           Crystal Clear A Human-Powered Methodology
           for Small Teams
           By Alistair Cockburn

           Publisher : Addison Wesley Professional
  Table of Pub Date : October 19, 2004
•
  Contents     ISBN : 0-201-69947-8
• Index       Pages : 336



           Carefully researched over ten years and eagerly anticipated by
           the agile community, Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered
           Methodology for Small Teams is a lucid and practical introduction
           to running a successful agile project in your organization. Each
           chapter illuminates a different important aspect of orchestrating
           agile projects.

           Highlights include

                Attention to the essential human and communication
                aspects of successful projects

                Case studies, examples, principles, strategies, techniques,
                and guiding properties

                Samples of work products from real-world projects instead
                of blank templates and toy problems

                Top strategies used by software teams that excel in
                delivering quality code in a timely fashion

                Detailed introduction to emerging best-practice techniques,
                such as Blitz Planning, Project 360°, and the essential
                Reflection Workshop

                Question-and-answer with the author about how he arrived
                at these recommendations, including where they fit with
                CMMI, ISO, RUP, XP, and other methodologies

                A detailed case study, including an ISO auditor's analysis of
                the project

           Perhaps the most important contribution this book offers is the
           Seven Properties of Successful Projects. The author has studied
successful agile projects and identified common traits they share.
These properties lead your project to success; conversely, their
absence endangers your project.
           Crystal Clear A Human-Powered Methodology
           for Small Teams
           By Alistair Cockburn

           Publisher : Addison Wesley Professional
           Pub Date : October 19, 2004
  Table of
•              ISBN : 0-201-69947-8
  Contents
              Pages : 336
• Index



  Copyright
  Praise for Crystal Clear
  The Agile Software Development Series
  Preface
    ORIGIN OF THE MATERIAL IN THIS BOOK
    CRYSTAL CLEAR IN THE CRYSTAL FAMILY
    THIS BOOK IN THE AGILE DEVELOPMENT SERIES
    HOW TO READ THIS BOOK
    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
   Chapter 1. Explained (View from the Outside)
   Chapter 2. Applied (The Seven Properties)
    PROPERTY 1. FREQUENT DELIVERY
    PROPERTY 2. REFLECTIVE IMPROVEMENT
    PROPERTY 3. OSMOTIC COMMUNICATION
    PROPERTY 4. PERSONAL SAFETY
    PROPERTY 5. FOCUS
    PROPERTY 6. EASY ACCESS TO EXPERT USERS
    PROPERTY 7. TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENT WITH AUTOMATED TESTS,
    CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT, AND FREQUENT INTEGRATION
    EVIDENCE: COLLABORATION ACROSS ORGANIZATIONAL
    BOUNDARIES
    REFLECTION ON THE PROPERTIES
   Chapter 3. In Practice (Strategies and Techniques)
    THE STRATEGIES
THE TECHNIQUES
REFLECTION ABOUT THE STRATEGIES AND TECHNIQUES
Chapter 4. Explored (The Process)
THE PROJECT CYCLE
THE DELIVERY CYCLE
THE ITERATION CYCLE
THE INTEGRATION CYCLE
THE WEEK AND THE DAY
THE DEVELOPMENT EPISODE
REFLECTION ABOUT THE PROCESS
Chapter 5. Examined (The Work Products)
THE ROLES AND THEIR WORK PRODUCTS
ROLES: SPONSOR, EXPERT USER, LEAD DESIGNER, DESIGNER-
PROGRAMMER, BUSINESS EXPERT, COORDINATOR, TESTER, WRITER
A NOTE ABOUT THE PROJECT SAMPLES
SPONSOR: MISSION STATEMENT WITH TRADE-OFF PRIORITIES
TEAM: TEAM STRUCTURE AND CONVENTIONS
TEAM: REFLECTION WORKSHOP RESULTS
COORDINATOR: PROJECT MAP, RELEASE PLAN, PROJECT STATUS,
ITERATION PLAN AND STATUS, VIEWING SCHEDULE, RISK LIST
COORDINATOR: PROJECT MAP
COORDINATOR: RELEASE PLAN
COORDINATOR: PROJECT STATUS
COORDINATOR: RISK LIST
COORDINATOR: ITERATION PLAN          ITERATION STATUS
COORDINATOR: VIEWING SCHEDULE
BUSINESS EXPERT AND EXPERT USER: ACTOR-GOAL LIST
BUSINESS EXPERT: REQUIREMENTS FILE
BUSINESS EXPERT AND EXPERT USER: USE CASES
EXPERT USER: USER ROLE MODEL
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMERS: SCREEN DRAFTS, SYSTEM
ARCHITECTURE, SOURCE CODE, COMMON DOMAIN MODEL, DESIGN
SKETCHES AND NOTES
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: SCREEN DRAFTS
LEAD DESIGNER: SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: COMMON DOMAIN MODEL
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: SOURCE CODE AND DELIVERY PACKAGE
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: DESIGN NOTES
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: TESTS
TESTER: BUG REPORT
WRITER: HELP TEXT, USER MANUAL, AND TRAINING MANUAL
REFLECTION ABOUT THE WORK PRODUCTS
Chapter 6. Misunderstood (Common Mistakes)
"WE COLOCATED AND RAN TWO-WEEK ITERATIONSWHY DID WE
FAIL?"
"TWO DEVELOPERS ARE SEPARATED BY A HALLWAY AND A LOCKED
DOOR."
"WE HAVE THIS BIG INFRASTRUCTURE TO DELIVER FIRST."
"OUR FIRST DELIVERY IS A DEMO OF THE DATA TABLES."
"NO USER IS AVAILABLE, BUT WE HAVE A TEST ENGINEER JOINING
US NEXT WEEK."
"ONE DEVELOPER REFUSES TO DISCUSS HIS DESIGN OR SHOW HIS
CODE TO THE REST."
"THE USERS WANT ALL OF THE FUNCTION DELIVERED TO THEIR
DESKS AT ONE TIME . . ."
"WE HAVE SOME MILESTONES LESS THAN A USE CASE AND SOME
BIGGER."
"WE WROTE DOWN A BASIC CONCEPT AND DESIGN OF THE SYSTEM.
WE ALL SIT TOGETHER, SO THAT SHOULD BE GOOD ENOUGH."
"WHO OWNS THE CODE?"
"CAN WE LET OUR TEST ENGINEER WRITE OUR TESTS? HOW DO WE
REGRESSION TEST THE GUI?"
"WHAT IS THE OPTIMAL ITERATION LENGTH?"
Chapter 7. Questioned (Frequently Asked)
QUESTION 1. WHAT IS THE GROUNDING FOR CRYSTAL?
QUESTION 2. WHAT IS THE CRYSTAL FAMILY?
QUESTION 3. WHAT KIND OF METHODOLOGY DESCRIPTION IS THIS?
QUESTION 4. WHAT IS THE SUMMARY SHEET FOR CRYSTAL CLEAR?
QUESTION 5. WHY THE DIFFERENT CHAPTER FORMATS?
QUESTION 6. WHERE IS CRYSTAL CLEAR IN THE PANTHEON OF
METHODOLOGIES?
QUESTION 7. WHAT ABOUT THE CMM(I)?
QUESTION 8. WHAT ABOUT UML AND ARCHITECTURE?
QUESTION 9. WHY AIM ONLY FOR THE SAFETY ZONE? CAN'T WE DO
BETTER?
QUESTION 10. WHAT ABOUT DISTRIBUTED TEAMS?
QUESTION 11. WHAT ABOUT LARGER TEAMS?
   QUESTION 12. WHAT ABOUT FIXED-PRICE AND FIXED-SCOPE
   PROJECTS?
   QUESTION 13. HOW CAN I RATE HOW "AGILE" OR HOW "CRYSTAL" WE
   ARE?
   QUESTION 14. HOW DO I GET STARTED?
  Chapter 8. Tested (A Case Study)
   THE FIELD REPORT
   THE AUDITOR'S REPORT
   REFLECTION ON THE FIELD AND AUDIT REPORTS
  Chapter 9. Distilled (The Short Version)
References
Index
Copyright
The author and publisher have taken care in the preparation of this book, but make
no expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assume no responsibility for
errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages
in connection with or arising out of the use of the information or programs contained
herein.

  Publisher: John Wait

  Editor in Chief: Don O'Hagan

  Acquisitions Editor: Paul Petralia

  Editorial Assistant: Michelle Vincenti

  Marketing Manager: Chris Guzikowski

  Cover Designer: Alan Clements

  Managing Editor: Gina Kanouse

  Senior Project Editor: Lori Lyons

  Indexer: Larry Sweazy

  Production: Jessica Balch and Pine Tree Composition, Inc.

  Manufacturing Buyer: Dan Uhrig

The publisher offers excellent discounts on this book when ordered in quantity for
bulk purchases or special sales, which may include electronic versions and/or
custom covers and content particular to your business, training goals, marketing
focus, and branding interests. For more information, please contact:

U. S. Corporate and Government Sales
(800) 382-3419
corpsales@pearsontechgroup.com

For sales outside the U. S., please contact:

International Sales
international@pearsoned.com

Visit us on the Web: www.phptr.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
20041096341

Copyright © 2005 Pearson Education, Inc.

All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is
protected by copyright, and permission must be obtained from the publisher prior to
any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise.
For information regarding permissions, write to:

Pearson Education, Inc.
Rights and Contracts Department
One Lake Street
Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458

Text printed in the United States on recycled paper at Courier in Stoughton, MA.

First printing, October 2004
Praise for Crystal Clear
 "Crystal Clear is beyond 'Agile' since I think that Crystal Clear is Agile +
 Flexible + Practical. 'Flexible and Practical' is important for us. This is not
 theoretical methodology but practical methodology that lots of people are
 doing. When I read Crystal Clear, I felt that this was easy to understand. This
 book helps us from software process hell to successful software development
 through practical examples and useful samples."

 Basaki Satoshi, Schlumberger

 "Alistair Cockburn shows how small teams can be highly effective at
 developing fit-for-purpose software by following a few basic software
 development practices and by creating proper team dynamics. These small
 teams can be much more effective and predictable than much larger teams
 that follow overly bureaucratic and prescriptive development processes."

 Todd Little, Sr. Development Manager, Landmark Graphics

 "I find Cockburn's writings on agile methods enlightening: He describes 'how
 to do,' of course, but also how to tell whether you're doing it right, to reach
 into the feeling of the project. This particular book's value is that actual project
 experiences leading to and confirming the principles and practices are
 so...well...clearly presented."

 Scott Duncan, ASQ Software Division Standards Chair and representative to
 the US SC7 TAG and IEEE S2ESC Executive Committee and Management
 Board and Chair of IEEE Working Group 1648 on agile methods

 "Crystal Clear identifies principles that work not only for software
 development, but also for any results-centric activities. Dr. Cockburn follows
 these principles with concrete, practical examples of how to apply the
 principles to real situations and roles and to resolve real issues."

 Niel Nickolaisen, COO, Deseret Book

 "All the successful projects I've been involved with or have observed over the
 past 19 or so years have had many of the same characteristics as described in
 Crystal Clear (even the big projects). And many of the failed projects failed
 because they missed somethingsuch as expert end-user involvement or
 accessibility throughout the project. The final story was a great read. Here was
 a project that in my opinion was an overwhelming successhigh productivity,
 high quality, delivery, happy customer, and the fact that the team would do it
 again. The differing styles in each chapter kept it interesting. I started reading
 it and couldn't put it down, and by the end, I just had to say 'Wow!'"

 Ron Holliday, Director, Fidelity Management Research
"Crystal Clear gives me both essential and practical ways of creating and
navigating motivated software development teams. At the same time, it
increases the quality of engineering life!"

Kenji Hiranabe, Project Manager, Eiwa System Management, Inc.

"Discussions around lightweight methods can become fairly esoteric and
abstract, but finally, each development organization has to codify an approach
that feels good, fits, and better yet, works. At Tomax we are still pursuing that
goal, but we're getting much closer, in part based on the interplay between
ideas and practices, philosophies, and methods that Alistair Cockburn so
successfully connects. Crystal Clear is the perfect counterpoint to Alistair's
earlier Agile Software Development, bringing some of the best thinking in the
agile development community down to street-level in the form of
implementable strategy and tactics. This book is essential reading for anyone
who shares the passion for creating quality software."

Eric Olafson, CEO, Tomax Corp.

"Imagine: Take a small group of developers, give them space, peace, tools,
and access to their end users. And let them flourish, delivering valuable
business software every few months. Efficiently, and without drama, Crystal
Clear is the pragmatic way for small teams to deliver big results."

Dave Thomas, co-author of The Pragmatic Programmer

"I like its emphasis on the human side of computing. I've never seen a book
on software engineering talk about personal safety, and their discussion of
easy access to expert users is very abstract...it explains much more about
managing a project than any non-management book I have seen. You don't
call it a management bookbut topics like amity and burn charts are usually
covered only in management books."

Ralph Johnson, Associate Professor, UIUC

"This is the methodology I never knew I was already using. This book
illuminates why the things I've been doing work, and also why some of the
things I was doing didn't work."

Jeff Patton, ThoughtWorks

"The Crystal Methodology System's biggest advantage is its flexibility. Crystal
allows organizations to tailor the methodology to meet their needsnot the
other way aroundincreasing your chances of getting everyone on board. As we
have implemented Crystal Clear, I have found the Crystal Methodology System
to be not only very people-oriented, but very result-oriented."

Jim Jorgensen, Project Manager, Web Services, Levi, Ray & Shoup, Inc.
"Alistair Cockburn is creative, understandable, experienced, and wise. He
speaks to the human side of process without discounting the technological
detail. Starting from a small set of powerful concepts, Crystal Clear elaborates
in various forms a rich collection of useful information. It captures experience,
provides practical advice, and best of all, generates wonderful food for
productive thought by managers and practitioners alike."

Richard Turner, author of CMMI Distilled, co-author of Balancing Agility and
Discipline

"Crystal brought me the closest rendition of what I see is the everyday life of a
software development project: a community/group of people creating and
inventing in a rather hostile/unfriendly/ wild economical environment. All along
their endeavor, people are struggling with a problem whose complexity is
compounded by the puzzling but essential interactions of the human beings in
the game. As I was myself stretching Crystal Clear to fit my particular
projects, I had the chance to see the birth of this book. What I see now is a
superb synthesis of the underlying principles and a clear description of the
strategies and specific techniques that should be used to bring a fair number
of software development projects in a safety zone while gaining both efficiency
and quality of life."

Géry Derbier, Project Manager, Solistic

"Once again, Alistair Cockburn has combined his highly developed sense of the
problems that software teams face and his visionary and useful
recommendations for how to improve software practices. This book provides
fundamental principles, easy-to-adopt techniques, and stories from the
trenches on human-powered approaches to develop quality software in
response to customer needs. I strongly recommend this book to practitioners
and students as a guide to build strong and effective software teams."

Lars Mathiassen, GRA Eminent Scholar, Center for Process Innovation, Georgia
State University

"This is a great resource for any pragmatic programmer who needs to put
together a full-fledged methodology for his team. Alistair is at his usual
comprehensive and helpful best."

Andy Hunt, co-author of The Pragmatic Programmer

"Alistair does a superb job of clearly and yet flexibly defining the least
methodology that could possibly work for the safe delivery of software by
small, co-located teams. Alistair exudes confidence in his methodology well
beyond 'trust me, it works.' He does this by immediately establishing
credibility in his extensive experience and by sharing details of experiences
with real teams. You can't help but believe him! And you can't help but
understand just how essential it is for small teams to practice Frequent
Delivery, Reflective Improvement, and Osmotic Communication. He delivers a
very powerful message in a variety of ways to touch the motivation and
understanding of many points of view."

Laurie Williams, author of Pair Programming Illuminated

"It's not 'just another methodology' that tells you what to do. Instead, it
conveys a broader, richer, understanding of small-team software development.
It includes clear, practical advice on how to tune the methodology to suit your
team. This helps readers to make their own choices, appropriate to their own
team, rather than just blindly following a 'recipe'-style methodology. Crystal
Clear is not just a theoryit is based on the real-world experiences of successful
teams."

John Rusk, www.agilekiwi.com

"This book is just bursting with sound, practical advice described in a very
accessible manner. Alistair perfects an incredible combination in giving clear
how-to descriptions while simultaneously providing you with the underlying
values and reflective discussions that stimulate your own thinking and creative
adaptation of the techniques and practices. We recently applied the 'burn-
down' charts with added scopeWow!"

Lise B. Hvatum, Product Development Manager, Schlumberger

"Crystal Clear is a must-read for anyone who expects a 'mature,' repeatable,
and ever-shorter software development cycle. It changes the focus and
attention from methodology, process, and measurement to the fundamental
and foundational human behaviors and organizational dynamics played out in
successful, reliable, and creative, software projects."

David Spann, Organizational Development and Adaptive Project Management
Consultant, and Adjunct Professor and former MBA Director, Westminster
College

"Crystal Clear guided our development and user teams to focus on what could
be done. As a result, we are finishing on time and under budget."

Ernie Nielsen, Managing Director of Enterprise Project Management, Brigham
Young University

"Many of the practices described in Crystal Clear can well be applied to large
construction projects. Getting the "management team" together early, process
planning by the team, communications and feedback, and the recognition of
change are inherent in hard construction projects as well....Crystal Clear
brings to the reader a new perspective for the Project Management process. A
must read for Project Managers."

Joseph M. Wolfe, Jr., Senior Program Manager, Making Projects Work, Inc.
"Crystal Clear illuminates the basics, the fundamentals, of agile development.
In sports we hear about coaches who stress fundamentals, the essential skills
of the game. Teams that lose track of the fundamentals also fail to execute the
complex. In talking about agile development, we often get caught up in the
complexlarge teams, distributed teams, embedded systems, and more. But
even for these situations, learning the basics of agile development are
essential, and that's what Alistair describes in vivid discussion, stories, and
examples. Learn the fundamentals firstread Crystal Clear."

Jim Highsmith, Director, Agile Software Development & Project Management
Advisory Service, Cutter Consortium
The Agile Software Development Series
Alistair Cockburn and Jim Highsmith, Series Editors

Agile software development centers on four values identified in the Agile Alliance's
Manifesto:

     Individuals and interactions over processes and tools

     Working software over comprehensive documentation

     Customer collaboration over contract negotiation

     Responding to change over following a plan

The development of Agile software requires innovation and responsiveness, based
on generating and sharing knowledge within a development team and with the
customer. Agile software developers draw on the strengths of customers, users, and
developers, finding just enough process to balance quality and agility.

The books in The Agile Software Development Series focus on sharing the
experiences of such Agile developers. Individual books address individual techniques
(such as Use Cases), group techniques (such as collaborative decision making), and
proven solutions to different problems from a variety of organizational cultures. The
result is a core of Agile best practices that will enrich your experience and improve
your work.

Titles in the Series:

Alistair Cockburn, Surviving Object-Oriented Projects, ISBN 0-201-49834-0

Alistair Cockburn, Writing Effective Use Cases, ISBN 0-201-70225-8

Lars Mathiassen, Jan Pries-Heje, and Ojelanki Ngwenyama, Improving Software
Organizations: From Principles to Practice, ISBN 0-201-75820-2

Alistair Cockburn, Agile Software Development, ISBN 0-201-69969-9

Jim Highsmith, Agile Software Development Ecosystems, ISBN 0-201-76043-6

Steve Adolph, Paul Bramble, Alistair Cockburn, and Andy Pols, Patterns for Effective
Use Cases, ISBN 0-201-72184-8

Anne Mette Jonassen Hass, Configuration Management Principles and Practice, ISBN
0-321-11766-2

DSDM Consortium and Jennifer Stapleton, DSDM, Second Edition: Business Focused
Development, ISBN 0-321-11224-5
Mary Poppendieck and Tom Poppendieck, Lean Software Development: An Agile
Toolkit, ISBN 0-321-15078-3

Craig Larman, Agile and Iterative Development: A Manager's Guide, ISBN 0-131-
11155-8

Jim Highsmith, Agile Project Management: Creating Innovative Products, ISBN 0-
321-21977-5

For more information visit www.awprofessional.com/series/agile
Preface
Crystal Clear: A few key rules to get a small project into its safety zone.

You have barely enough resources to get the system out. You don't want the team
to write long documents, but they are forgetting things they are supposed to know
about. You dislike heavy software development processes, but you want your team
to work better than just randomly. You particularly want the software to come out
the door successfully.

You considered sitting down and writing out the basic discussions the team should
have and the work products they must be careful to attend to. You asked yourself:

  What have other small, successful project teams done?

     What practices do they use?

This book answers those questions. It is the result of ten years of debriefing
successful small teams. Most of them repeated the same message:

     Seat people close together, communicating frequently and with goodwill.

     Get most of the bureaucracy out of their way and let them design.

     Get a real user directly involved.

     Have a good automated regression test suite available.

     Produce shippable functionality early and often.

Do all that, and most of the process details will take care of themselves.

This book sets out one of the most efficient and habitable methodologies you might
hope to find: Crystal Clear. It is a human-powered methodology, most simply
described as follows:

  The lead designer and two to seven other developers in a large room or
  adjacent rooms, with information radiators such as whiteboards and flip charts
  on the wall, having access to key users, distractions kept away, delivering
  running, tested, usable code every month or two (okay, three at the most),
  periodically reflecting and adjusting on their working style.

This simple recommendation rests on both experience and theory. Software
development can be characterized as an economically constrained cooperative game
of invention and communication.[1] The way the team plays each game has
everything to do with the project's outcome and the resulting software. Crystal Clear
tackles the economic-cooperative game directly, addressing where to pay attention,
where to simplify, and how to vary the rules. A number of teams have shared with
meand now with you, through this bookexamples of their rules, work products, and
even office layouts.

  [1] Described at length in Agile Software Development (Cockburn 2002) and recapped in the first answer of Chapter 7.



Many so-called "best" methodologies get rejected by a team as being too
constraining, too invasive, or too difficult. Crystal Clear does not aspire to be a
"best" methodology; it aspires to be "sufficient," in order that your team will shape
it to itself and then actually use it.
ORIGIN OF THE MATERIAL IN THIS BOOK
The IBM Consulting Group asked me in 1991 to write a methodology for object-
technology projects. Not knowing enough about methodologies at that time to make
the crucial decisions, and at the suggestion of my boss, Kathy Ulisse,[2] I started
interviewing project teams. What they told me was very different from what I had
been reading in the books. In particular, they stressed aspects not covered in the
methodology texts: close communication, morale, access to end users, and so on. It
was not long before these issues separated in stark contrast the successful projects
I visited from the failing ones. I came to see these issues, and not the design
techniques, as the key to reaching a successful project outcome.

  [2] Thanks for the brilliant advice, Kathy!



I got to try these ideas out as lead consultant on a $15 million, fixed-price, fixed-
scope project of forty-five people. The ideas worked as advertised (coupled with a
lot of creativity along the way), and showed themselves as core success factors. I
wrote up the lessons learned from the project interviews and that project in
Surviving Object-Oriented Projects (Cockburn 1998).[3]

  [3] The project debriefings ended up as the basis for my doctoral dissertation, "People and Methodologies in Software Development" (Cockburn 2003a).



One particular triplet showed up repeatedly: colocation of the team, frequent
delivery, and access to an expert user. The differences in results between projects
that did and didn't do these far exceeded any other short list of practices. This book
builds from that triplet.

The projects in my career have generally been of the fixed-price, fixed-scope
variety. People usually underbid on these projects, which means that the only way
the team can deliver on time is by being very creative with their development
process. Unlike most of the other authors of the Agile Development Manifesto, I
came to the agile principles through the need for efficiency, not the need to handle
rapidly changing requirements.

As a result, Crystal Clear is well suited to the fixed-price context. If you are in such
a situation, use the planning, communication, and reporting mechanisms I describe
to meet your (probably unrealistic) deadline, and just be careful not to change the
requirements at the start of every iteration. If you have an exploratory project in
which the requirements are unknown or fluid, that is fine. Then allow the
requirements to move at the start of each iteration.
CRYSTAL CLEAR IN THE CRYSTAL FAMILY
Crystal is a family of methodologies with a common genetic code, one that
emphasizes frequent delivery, close communication and reflective improvement.
There is no one Crystal methodology. There are different Crystal methodologies for
different types of projects. Each project or organization uses the genetic code to
generate new family members.

The name "Crystal" comes from my characterization of projects along two
dimensions, size and criticality, matching that of minerals, color and hardness (see
Figure 7-1).

Larger projects, which require more coordination and communication, map to darker
colors (clear, yellow, orange, red, and so on). Projects for systems that can cause
more damage need added hardness in the methodology, as well as more validation
and verification rules. A quartz methodology is suited to a few developers creating
an invoicing system. The same team controlling the movement of boron rods in a
nuclear reactor needs a diamond methodologyone calling for repeated checks on
both the design and the implementation of their algorithms.

I characterize Crystal methodologies by color, according to the number of people
being coordinated: Clear is for collocated teams of 8 or fewer people, Yellow is for
teams of 1020 people, Orange is for 2050 people, Red is for 50100 people, and so
on, through Maroon, Blue, and Violet. Crystal Orange is described in Surviving
Object-Oriented Projects (Cockburn 1998), and its variant Crystal Orange/Web is
described in Agile Software Development (Cockburn 2002). I find that, except on
life-critical projects, people can add in the verification activities through the
methodology shaping and tuning workshops.[4]

  [4] If your company develops FDA- or other life-critical "validated" systems, you may want to set up three base methodologies; one for a Clear (quartz)
  projects, one for Yellow or Orange, and a third for all of the validated systems. Those three should provide adequate basis for shaping to any of the projects
  in your company.



Crystal's genetic code is made up of:

       The economic-cooperative game model

       Selected priorities

       Selected properties

       Selected principles

       Selected sample techniques

       Project examples
The economic-cooperative game model says that software development is a series
of "games" whose moves consist of nothing else besides inventing and
communicating, which is typically resource limited. Each game in the series has two
goals that compete for resources: to deliver the software in this game and to set up
for the next game in the series. The game never repeats, so each project calls for
strategies slightly different from all previous games. The economic-cooperative
game model leads people on a project to think about their work in a very specific,
focused, and effective way.

The priorities common to the Crystal family are

     Safety in the project outcome

     Efficiency in development

     Habitability of the conventions (the developers can live with them)

Crystal has the project team steer toward seven safety properties, the first three
properties of which are core to Crystal. The others can be added in any order to
increase safety margin. The properties are

     Frequent delivery

     Reflective improvement

     Close communication

     Personal safety (the first step in trust)

     Focus

     Easy access to expert users

     Technical environment with automated testing, configuration management,
     and frequent integration

Crystal's principles are described in detail in Agile Software Development (Cockburn
2002). Among them are a few central ideas:

     The amount of detail needed in the requirements, design, and planning
     documents varies with the project circumstances, specifically the extent of
     damage that might be caused by undetected defects and the frequency of
     personal collaboration enjoyed by the team.

     It might not be possible to eliminate all intermediate work products and
     promissory notes such as requirements, design documents, and project plans;
     but they can be reduced to the extent that short, rich, informal communication
     paths are available to the team and working, tested software is delivered early
     and frequently.

     The team continually adjusts its working conventions to fit the particular
     personalities on the team, the current local working environment, and the
     peculiarities of the specific assignment.

Among the rest are trade-off curves that highlight the cost implications of different
communication mechanisms, different project situations, and different strategies for
concurrent development. I used the principles to derive Crystal Clear, but don't
discuss them separately in this book.

The Crystal package includes selected sample techniques, including ones for
methodology shaping, planning, and reflective improvement. Crystal does not
require any specific technique to be used by any of the people on the project, so
these techniques are included only as a starter set.

Each member of the Crystal family is generated at the start of a project by shaping
a base methodology according to the genetic code. Since the situation changes over
time, the methodology is retuned during the course of the project. Both shaping and
tuning are performed fast enough that the time spent gets repaid within the project
time frame.

Crystal Clear is an optimization of Crystal that can be applied when the team
consists of two to eight people sitting in the same room or in adjacent offices. The
property of close communication is strengthened to "osmotic" communication,
meaning that the people overhear each other discussing project priorities, status,
requirements, and design on a daily basis. This enhanced communication allows the
team to work more from tacit communication and small notes than otherwise would
be possible.

Because every company and project is slightly different, even Crystal Clear is not
fully specified. The first steps in adopting Crystal Clear are to uncover your
organization's strong points and weaknesses and to fit the recommendations of
Crystal Clear around them to capitalize on the strong points and cover the
weaknesses.

For some organizations, this is too much work. Crystal Clear is not for those
organizations. It is for groups that want to build their own, personal, strong, and
effective way to deliver software repeatedly.

Crystal Clear shares some characteristics with XP but is generally less demanding.
You might think of it as a more laid-back alternative, a place to fall back to if XP
isn't working for the group, or a springboard to get some agile practices in place
before jumping into XP.
THIS BOOK IN THE AGILE DEVELOPMENT SERIES
This book is part of the Agile Software Development series edited by Jim Highsmith
and myself. The series describes both theory and practice for software development.

The theoretical underpinnings are discussed in four books: Agile Software
Development (Cockburn 2002), Adaptive Software Development (Highsmith 2000),
Agile Project Management (Highsmith 2004), and Lean Software Development
(Poppendieck 2003).

The other books in the series pick up the thread either by describing a technique for
a particular individual or role, a technique set for the entire team, or a methodology
sample.

     We find attention to the role of project manager in Surviving Object-Oriented
     Projects (Cockburn 1998) and Agile Project Management (Highsmith 2004),
     and attention to the role of requirements writer in Writing Effective Use Cases
     (Cockburn 2001b) and Patterns for Effective Use Cases (Adolph 2002).

     We find attention to the entire team in Improving Software Organizations
     (Mathiassen 2001) [OK] and Configuration Management (Haas 2003).

     Specific agile methodologies are described in DSDM (Stapleton 2003), Agile
     Software Development Ecosystems (Highsmith 2003), Agile and Iterative
     Development: A Manager's Guide (Larman 2003), and this book.

Future books will follow the theme, adding techniques for collaboration and team
health.
HOW TO READ THIS BOOK
Some people will read this book as an introduction to agile development techniques,
and be relatively new to pair programming, test-driven development, osmotic
communication, economic-cooperative game, continuous integration, and
information radiators.

If that is you, then read this book pretty much straight through, because you are
the person for whom I designed the chapter ordering.

     I wrote the Chapter 1, Explained (View from the Outside), as an e-mail
     exchange between Crystal and myself to expose how these teams look to an
     outsider (remember, it was once all new to me, too).

     Chapter 2, Applied (The Seven Properties), is the most important chapter. It
     describes what the team is aiming for, not the procedure it uses to get there.

     Chapter 3, In Practice (Strategies and Techniques), should give you a handle
     on how some of this is done.

     Chapter 4, Explored (The Process), describes the cyclical development
     processes core to all agile (indeed all modern) methodologies. It is something
     in which everyone should be fluent.

     Just scan Chapter 5, Examined (The Work Products), on the first pass, since it
     is very detailed. Use it as an encyclopedia of work product samples when you
     get that far.

     Chapter 6, Misunderstood (Common Mistakes), and Chapter 7, Questioned
     (Frequently Asked), should answer questions about what counts as okay and
     not-okay variations.

     Chapter 8, Tested (A Case Study), gives you another chance to see the
     methodology from the outside, since it was written for people not familiar with
     Crystal Clear. It also contains an ISO 9001 auditor's analysis and
     recommendations, which shines light from a different angle.

     Read Chapter 9, Distilled (The Short Version), to see if it makes sense at that
     point. If it doesn't, you may have to go back to Chapter 7 to see why such a
     simple recommendation works.

Some people are fully versed in modern agile development, including test-driven
design and continuous integration. If you are one such person, I suggest you go
directly to Chapter 9. After that (when you are done snickering), read Chapter 2,
probably the most important chapter in the book. My guess is that you will find
some new ideas to try out in Chapter 3. After looking through those chapters, return
to Chapter 9 to see if it all hangs together for you.
If you are giving this to your boss or manager, my hope is that the first chapter,
with its e-mail format, is the kind of thing that can be read on the airplane or in the
bathtub. A manager or executive should also read the Chapter 4, because learning
how to fit a cyclical process into the organization is important.

Process or methodology designers are quite likely to turn straight to Chapter 5,
because this is a standard way of evaluating methodologies (although in the case of
Crystal Clear, quite insufficient). To complete the evaluation, though, you need also
to read Chapter 7 to see the comparison with other methodology systems.

Finally, you will be ready to start. At this point, read the answer to the last question
in Chapter 7, "How do I get started?", and work from there. That will take you back
to the methodology shaping and reflection techniques, and Chapter 2.

I wrote each chapter in its own unique style and tone. There is a reason for this.
People learning a methodology are in much the same situation as blind men trying
to guess the shape of an elephant, each feeling a different part and coming up with
a different answer. Each person's unique background causes that person to notice
and look for different things. Therefore, the nine different chapters are written in
quite different ways. I don't expect everyone to be happy with every chapter, but I
do hope that everyone finds some chapter that addresses his and her individual
background and interests.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am indebted to many more people for this book than for any of my previous ones:
people who told me their stories, people who tried out the ideas, people who
contributed samples, people who reviewed the text, and people who supported me
emotionally.

Most of the people who told me their project stories during the last ten years don't
know how much value they provided as they explainedeven apologized for!their
ways of working. They often said, "We don't use a methodology here, we just . . .,"
or "I'm sorry, we don't bother to do [xyz], or maintain our documents, but we have
found. . . ." It was only by comparing results across a number of projects that I
discovered that in many of these instances no apology was ever needed and that
there was a strength in the way they worked.

Certain people were pioneers in trying out these ideas out on their projects. Jens
Coldewey was the first, back in 1998, Robert Volker in 1999, Géry Derbier in 2002,
Stephen Sykes in 2003. Dr. Christopher Jones tried out an early version on his
unsuspecting senior software engineering students (who used every imaginable
implementation technology). His students showed me where my writing was
ambiguous or poorly described. Stephen got permission for me to include both his
field report and the auditor's analysis in this book, a huge contribution.

Pete McBreen kept reminding me that people are also valuable carryovers from one
project to the next (something I knew, but which kept slipping out of my
descriptions until Pete reminded me again). Jeff Patton and Andy Pols were continual
discussion partners on the topics.

Quite a number of people contributed office photos and work samples. Their names
are listed separately in the permissions section and next to their contributions in the
book, but I should like to highlight their importance here. For me as a writer
intending to create something useful to you as a reader, it was important to have
real work samples and not dummied up toy examples. These people recognized that
importance and contributed what they had. I expect that all readers will appreciate
their contributions.

Luke Hohmann and Tom Poppendieck read everything I wrote with astonishing
thoroughness and caught errors of omission, commission, and even intention. Tom
came up with the idea of dating the e-mails instead of numbering them. (Duh, why
didn't I think of that? Thanks, Tom.)

Rich Turner is one of the people who could help me with the CMM(I) discussion in
the context of Crystal Clear, and I'm thankful for his advice and review.

The Silicon Valley Patterns Group, and especially Russ Rufer and Chris Lopez, who
read the manuscript carefully not just once, but twice, giving their usual thoughtful
comments and pushing back on me when they felt I had gone off track. Russ argued
me down relentlessly on some of sections until I finally got his point.
A few people read it from the Web and wrote in with corrections and improvements.
Thank you, Marco Cova, Todd Little, Alan Griffiths, Howard Fear, Victoria Einarsson,
Paul Chisholm, Pierce McMartin, Phillipe Back, Todd Jonker, Chris Matts, Gain Wong,
Jeremy Brown, John Rusk, Johannes Brodwall, and Toby Kraft for your eagle
eyesight.

The people in the Salt Lake Agile Group round table even ran through a "design the
box" exercise for Crystal one day. The top quote from that day was,

  "I've used Crystal all my life, and I've never been the same!"

Thanks to Jim Highsmith, discussion partner and series coeditor for the many
illuminating discussions that shaped our ideas, our book series, and the wonderful
Agile Development Conference in 2003.

Thanks to my new favorite coffee shop, the Salt Lake Coffee Break, which stays
open until 2:00 A.M., has interesting clientele, power outlets that work, and baklava
and Turkish coffee for those rare moments. Thanks to my familyto Deanna for
checking in with me at the coffee shop at 1:00 A.M. to see how the typing was
going (and then letting me sleep in in the morning), and to Kieran, Sean, and
Cameron for their positive regard of my writing habit.
Chapter 1. Explained (View from the Outside)
I distilled Crystal Clear by asking successful small teams what they would keep or
change in the ways they worked. They responded with this deceptively simple set of
rules. This chapter is written as an e-mail exchange between the fictitious Crystal
and me. The e-mails let you encounter the rules from the outside, as I first did, and
allow me to push back against Crystal's reports by asking questions.

The following e-mails are written to simulate what it is like to encounter for the first
time a team doing Crystal Clear. While writing, I discovered that it was better to
write as though Crystal were the one doing the project interviews and teaching
Alistair-the-author, even though in real life Alistair did the interviewing. In what
follows, Alistair gets to be the slowpoke, with Crystal pulling him reluctantly along,
even scolding him on occasion.

Here is the office layout Crystal refers to:


    Figure 1-1. A work setting showing osmotic communication.
                        (Courtesy of Tomax)




  June 1: Dear Alistair,

  Just getting back from my trip to Cryogenic Commerce, and I have to tell you
  what I saw. This must be the dozenth time I have visited a successful software
  group, and there is great similarity between the really productive ones. I know
  many organizations want to work in an extremely fast, productive way, so I
  am going to capture this one for the others who want to do so, too. The folks
  at C.C. were articulate about what they did, so I think I can answer your
  questions.
The project consists of three people, Kim, Pat and Chris. Kim is the team
leader and lead designer.

Kim says that they run all projects with two to four people if possible, because
that is how many they can coordinate easily. They run six people on occasion,
but that is a stretch and they refuse to go larger than that. They say that if
they need more than six people, they haven't set up their project scope
correctly.

They all sit in one room, as in the photo. They do this whenever they can, but
if, for some reason, they have to use separate offices, they arrange for them
to be next to each other.

Very close contact is one of the most important things to their way of working.
They want communicating to be as easy as calling across the room. There is
just too much happening for them to have to pick up the phone or walk down
the hall. They can get away with adjacent offices, but only barely.

I asked what they use for their requirements and design medium. They
pointed to the whiteboard and said, "There is our design medium."

Using the whiteboard as the primary design medium is one of the things I
have found over and over. One project manager told me, and it was on a much
larger project, that he was so pressed for time that they just photographed the
whiteboard as their design documentation! Another time the team leader
showed me the tables, lines, and scribbles on his whiteboard and said, "I defy
you to tell me what published methodology supports THIS notation!"

I have to agree. I have seen many sketches on whiteboards around the world.
I can hardly think of a better medium. The only thing is that you can't fold it
up and take it with you! Thank goodness there are printing whiteboards and
PC-attached whiteboards, the Mimio radio device for ordinary whiteboards, and
digital cameras.[1] I could easily cost justify any of those on saved
communication time.

Kim said they use very light use cases as a basis for requirements. I'll send
you an example of their two paragraph use cases later on.

On occasion they find they can live with even briefer requirements. They have
very good links to their users, so the lighter stories are mostly just a reminder
of what must be developed. The continuous conversations with the users keep
the requirements accurate.

Once they collect their use cases and other requirements, they don't create
many other archived deliverables except the final commented code and the
user help text. I know this may sound incredible, but I have seen it over and
over and over again, in the highest productivity groups I have found, and I
don't think it can be ignored.

They hold design reviews at the whiteboard. There is no formal writing for
these, most of the information is conveyed in the talking and hand
movements, with some instance diagrams and interaction diagrams drawn
along the way, and some other diagrams.[2] Some of these do not match any
published drawing standardbut why should they, if everyone in the room
understands what they mean?

What else is there to say?

They look over each other shoulders a lot, sometimes doing side-by-side
programming,[3] so they get a lot of code reviewing done on a continuous
basis. They like this, calling it "peer code peering." I have run into some form
or another of this in many places.

Extreme Programming (XP) people take the idea the farthest, programming in
pairs. XPers say they catch more mistakes this way, sooner, than they would
ever have imagined, and the resulting designs are better. It also gives them
some intellectual backup. There is always someone else who understands a bit
of how each person's code is built, and they also learn programming tricks
from each other.

I did ask Kim and company whether they used ROOM or DOOM or UML or OML
or any of the other published methodology things. They were not at all shy on
this one! Pat said, "Our job is to get software out, not spend our time drawing
pictures!" Chris said, "Who should we draw them for and why? Our users see
the results so quickly, and we all understand the insides thoroughly. You've
seen our whiteboards." Kim added, "We tried them for a while, but we are so
closely linked that they don't add anything."

This was a very outspoken group, but I have encountered this reaction from
other teams, and not just small ones. Most small teams are a little apologetic
about not using the drawing notations and tools, as though they are doing
something wrong. On the other hand, an architect on a 150-person project
said he doubts that graphical techniques scale and so on his large project they
kept all their design information in text.

Well, there you have it. No doubt you have some questions, so fire away and
I'll see what I can answer.

Cheerily, Crystal



Dear Crystal,

Thanks for the description. I guess I do have one question to start
with. Did you get enough detail to describe their process? What
happened and what did they do, and what happened then and what
did they do?

Best regards, Alistair
June 2: Dear Alistair,

Yes and no. I stuck around for several days, so I could see them in action.
What I would say is this, and you can do with it what you want. . . .

Their minute-to-minute process was so complicated that I couldn't possibly
write it all down, and if I could, you couldn't possibly follow it, let alone install
it on another team.

What I would say is that they strive to develop a community mind. They sat
down at the beginning and understood the problem they were solving, worked
out how they were going to go about it, and then started working. They are in
close enough communication that they know what is important and what is
happening. That is enough to keep them in step with each other, and they let
the dance, as it were, improvise itself around them.

Here's what I can offer:

First, they interview their users and their sponsoring executive. Pat also went
and watched the users at work, so Pat became the local expert on user
actions. They collected requirements as two-paragraph use cases, you recall.
They prioritized these with the users, so they knew which ones delivered the
greatest value and which ones were needed first.

Then they got their technology requirements straight, what they had to use
and what they could use. Kim is the technical leader, so Kim pretty much
decided on the technology and laid out the basic architecture.

Third, they made a delivery plan, which included a delivery every two months.

Within each delivery, they first discuss the purpose of screens and screen
sequences with users, using either just words or pencil and paper, until they
are pretty clear on the user requirements. They discuss how to set up the core
business objects and who gets what parts of the system.

Typically, Kim takes the infrastructure, Pat takes the user interface, and Chris
takes the business objects. They are not hung up on this. There have been
times when Pat and Chris each took both business objects and user interface
objects, and they shared frameworks.

There is an initial demo to the user, after a couple of days or a couple of
weeks, using just the screen and some dummied up data. A fully functional
demo comes after perhaps a month. Everyone learns something from these,
even though they have been in discussion quite closely.

I'll tell you what happened one time, just so you understand.

Chris had gotten all the user screens pretty much right and all, but the first
prototype took seven seconds round-trip for a transaction. The user looked at
the screen and asked, "Uh, is that the way it is going to perform in real life?"
Chris said, "Well, we have some performance tuning to do, but more or less,
yes. Why?" The user replied that she gets sent a fax with hundreds of lines on
it, and she simply types from the fax, "heads down," as it were, never looking
at the screen, but just touch typing the hundreds of entries. She couldn't
possibly wait seven seconds between each line.

Chris was dumbfounded. "But what do you do if there is a typing error?" "Oh,
well this is all recorded just for tax deduction purposes, so actually we don't
much care if there is an error. It isn't worth the time to correct it," answered
the user.

Chris was quite shaken up by how badly they had misunderstood the
requirements, even after interviewing the user and showing drafts of the
screens and all. I guess it just goes to show you the difference between a
mockup and real usage.

That's most of their "process."

Cheers, Crystal



Dear Crystal,

Thanks for the field notes. I look forward to your next installment.
Tell me about testing. Do they have test tools, regression tests,
external testers, what do they do?

Thanks, Alistair




June 3: Dear Alistair,

Yes, I meant to get to testing sooner or later. First let me finish off the
process, and the testing will show up.

Imagine they have a delivery period lasting 2 months. They go over the
requirements with the users, and start drafting their design. Here is where the
process gets fuzzy.

Some of the people at C.C. are "thinkers," others are "typers."

The thinkers sit down and think about the problem, designing on paper or
whiteboard for as long as they can stand, until they either have a design they
believe in or else they have to start programming to work out their confusion.
This thinking sometimes takes a few minutes, other times it takes hours, or
even a couple of days in the worst case. After they program some real code,
they learn more about how their design is working, and they either continue
with it, or think and draw some more on how it needs to be changed.

The "typers" just start typing right away. At least, that's how it looks. What
they really do is think about a tiny piece of functionality, write a unit test if
they're doing test-driven development, and then get that tiny section of code
working. When they add the next section, they refactor the two together to
improve the design. These people spend more time typing and less staring
than the others, but I can't particularly tell that it makes any real difference in
the long run. It seems to be more a personality thing.

Constant testing. The best groups, and C.C. is one of them, deliberately
design an architecture that supports fully automated regression testing. Some
groups run their tests from the workspace window, then stick them right into
the class system with the rest of the production code. Other groups stick them
into files and run batch jobs against their code, pulling the test cases out of
the files.

Kim said that it is hard to convince even experienced people to bother setting
up a system architecture that supports regression testing and to build test
cases as they go. However, once they experience the pleasure of developing
with automated regression tests at their fingertips, they never go back. The
regression tests and batch test architecture give them a freedom to make
changes and a feeling of security they never had before. They make some
changes, then push the test button, and find out if they messed up something
that was working before.

Let's see, process. . . . They have a number of small design reviews within the
team, they demo the system to the users a couple of times, build regression
tests, and at some point they declare they are done. They write the user
manual or help text, create a production build, run the tests again, and then
deliver the system to some friendly users

How am I doing?

Crystal



Dear Crystal,

Doing fine. Now, every methodology must announce its tolerances.
You are saying that Crystal Clear has tolerances like this:

      Coding style has great tolerance, being a matter for the team to
      decide.

      On the other hand, regression testing, peer code peering, user
      links, and short releases are matters with very little tolerance.

      Team size has some tolerance, the range being 28 people.

      Release length has some tolerance, the range being 13 months.

I am with you on those things. I am still stuck on the process,
though. It seems that they just "run around and do stuff." I sort of
get the idea, but I can't think of how to describe it to someone else.

What do you think we should do about this lack of description?

Trusting you, but still confused,

Alistair




June 4: Dear Alistair,

Get serious, Alistair, these are grown people, and they have normal mental
equipment. What do they do? They look around, they think, they talk to each
other, that's what they do.

One note about the team lead or lead designer, though:

Kim said that they always have one experienced person on the team. They
often have one novice. If they have two rank novices, the team lead must be
particularly experienced and good.

I recall you told me about your first job fresh out of college, and it wasn't
much different. You were on a team of three designing a hardware subsystem
of a flight simulator. You were the novice. You shared the office with your boss,
the team leader, and the lead designer. The other designer sat in the office
across from you. Your boss designed the subsystem's architecture and you
other two contributed design and ideas.

Your team leader had been through it before, and his boss had been through
more. You lived it and learned it. And that was on a project with 26 designers
total. It is much easier if the entire project is only three to five people.

Are you willing to trust that three intelligent trained people can use their
common sense?

The main thing is that the overall process delivers releases often enough that
there is little time for the project to go far off track.

So there.

You talk about techniques. Well, these people use every technique known to
computer science, and a bunch of stuff never described. That is why this
methodology has to have a lot of tolerance. They care about how the end
result looks, not what sequence someone went through to invent it.

Cheers as always, Crystal



Dear Crystal,
Uh, thanks for that, I think I needed it. Somehow it is just so easy to
forget about people thinking and talking to each other when doing
this process stuff. :-(

Actually, I *am* wondering how to make this ISO/CMM(I) certifiable,
[4]
    but let's leave that for a while and figure out what else there is to
say.

Okay, you've talked about team setup, user connections, incremental
iterative development, use cases, deliverables, testing, what else is
there to cover?

Regards, Alistair




  [4] See the auditor's analysis in Chapter 8.



June 5: Dear Alistair,

You forgot to mention something critically important in a methodology: team
values. That drives the rest of the methodology.

The key phrase here is "light on work products, strong on communications,"
with reflective improvement. They work on developing a community mind,
with constant linkage to the users and frequent demonstrations and deliveries.
The favored milestone is delivered functionality, and with that they can correct
almost any problem.

By staying light on the work products, they move much faster, and they
change directions faster. Since they can move faster, they can deliver
something useful in less time, thus making their milestones. Since they deliver
in less time, they need fewer intermediate work products. It is self-reinforcing,
as you see.

They view developing software as an evolving conversationan economic-
cooperative game, actually. In any one move they go forward and create
reminders for each other.

Is that enough to satisfy you?

Cheerily, Crystal



Dear Crystal,

That's great, thanks. I'll see if I can capture what you have said in
some sort of closed format so someone can walk away with it on
paper.
Shall I use the list of methodology elements I use in my other books,
with roles, deliverables, teams, skills, standards, and all that? I'm
afraid I'll have trouble with all this tolerance you want me to stick in
there.

What really strikes me about this is that when you write down how
an organization works, even a small group with a light methodology
and small set of deliverables, it really looks complicated!

Best regards, Alistair




June 6: Dear Alistair,

I'll propose something shorter, more stable and easier to remember than your
tables and tuples. I think that some of the items in your tuples aren't really
critical, and there are multiple pathways that work.

How about focusing on the key properties they set into place, and let different
teams to follow their own preferred paths, just as long as they establish the
properties.

For example: Frequent Delivery as a property. How frequent is frequent, and
just exactly what counts as a delivery? How do they do the delivery? I propose
we leave the answers up to the team to decide, as long as frequent deliveries
of some sort are happening. Some of the others would be:

  Reflective Improvement

  Osmotic Communication

  Personal Safety

  Focus

  Easy Access to Expert Users

and don't forget their

Technical Environment, with automated testing, configuration management,
frequent integration.

For the work products, provide samples. They will be much more useful than
templates. Get whiteboard photos, sketches, whatever, from real teams.

Yes, even a small methodology is a complex thing, but what do you expect? It
is the encoding of a culture, and of a successful culture which produces serious
software. Crystal Clear is as simple and short as I can keep it, but I can't
make it simpler than it is.

Just let go of the techniques.

Cheerily, Crystal



Dear Crystal,

Got it. We'll consider techniques a "local matter" then.

Here's the next question. Many people will think that Crystal Clear
will only work with all expert developers.

What do you have to say about this?

Best regards, Alistair




June 7: Dear Alistair,

Relevant question. Long answer. . . .

People learning a new skill pass through three quite different stages of
behavior, known as following, detaching, and fluency. We can call them levels
1, 2, and 3. These stages of learning are well known in aikido, where they are
called Shu, Ha, and Ri, which translate roughly to follow, break, leave. It is
probably not an accident that craft houses in the Middle Ages also had three
levels: apprentice, journeyman, and master.

This is all described in Agile Software Development, but it may be a good idea
to summarize here, also.

In Japan, they draw Shu-Ha-Ri with the characters:[5]


                          Figure 1-2. Shu, Ha, Ri.




A person just starting can't learn multiple methods at once, even if there are
ten that could work. So in Level 1, the following stage, people look for one
procedure that works. They copy it. They learn it. They measure success by
how well they can follow it. In fact, they take for granted that it works, and
can get very upset if it fails on them.

The Shu stage manifests itself in software development methodologies as
thick, detailed manuals.

This book is an example. Crystal Clear can be described in one sentence (as in
Chapter 9). To an experienced software developer, this one sentence is
adequate guidance.

That sentence is not enough for a Level 1 practitioner. He wants details of
what to do. When I expand a particular technique, process or work product, I
am writing to readers at Level 1 on that particular item.

Everyone is Level 1 on a new skill. Even advanced developers work at Level 1
the first time they try a Reflection Workshop.

Eventually, they recognize that the technique won't serve all situations.

In the detaching, or Level 2 stage, they look for rules about when the
procedure breaks down. Let me give you two examples.

In the 1990s, organizations that had become highly tuned to Information
Engineering (IE) architectures suddenly had to deliver object-oriented
software. They first tried to adapt the IE methods, then they developed
completely new development methodologies. Along the way, they often
regressed through totally ad hoc techniques before discovering new structures
to support the OO projects.

A second shift happened after the Agile Development Manifesto was published
in 2001.[6] Many groups trying it out found a mismatch between agile and their
standard organizational practices. So they experimented with alternative
ideas.

Eventually, people become fluent in enough situations that they stop paying
attention to which technique they are using at any moment. They invent,
blend, and adapt everything they know faster than they can even describe.

This is the fluency, or Level 3 stage.

Level 3 developers don't pay huge attention to the methodology formula. They
pay attention to what is happening on the project and make process
adjustments on the fly. They understand the desired end effect and simply
make their way to that end. Simply stating the desired Properties of the
project suffices for them.

Discussions among Level 3 people sound distressingly Zen:

  "Use a technique so long as it is doing some good."

  "Do whatever works."
   "When you are really doing it, you are unaware that you are doing it."

To someone at the fluency level, this is all true. To someone still detaching, it
is confusing. To someone looking for a procedure to follow, it is useless.

The one-sentence description of Crystal Clear is enough for the Level 3
developer. That description has been used directly by several project leaders,
one of whom reported back later, "We did what you said, and it worked!"
(which, to a Level 1 audience, doesn't communicate very much).

Try being aware of these levels the next time you are in a meeting. You are
quite likely to find two people stuck in an argument, and notice that they are
at different levels on the current topic. What is a natural set of variations for
one person seems bewilderingly vague to the other. If you identify the level
difference, the two can negotiate the level of the discussion, or at least be
more patient with each other.

All of this applies to Crystal Clear.

I don't think that Crystal Clear can be run by a team of all Level 1
practitioners. I doubt that these 300 pages of description are explicit enough.

Tom Poppendieck describes the paradox neatly: Level 1 people need the detail,
but can't handle its complexity. Level 3 people can handle the complexity, but
have little use for the detail.

To deal with that paradox, I have in Crystal Clear that any one project needs
at least one Level 3 developer or two Level 2 developers. That lead designer
expands the information on the fly.

These pages support him or her in doing that.

In practice, the lead designer more or less runs the project. Often there is one
other fairly experienced person, but the rest are all at various stages of
beginning or middling (some young, inexperienced, and bright, some older and
tired or just at their maximum level of capability).

So finally I can answer your question: No, it is not the case that Crystal Clear
will only work with all expert developers. But at least one of them needs to be
a Level 3 developer.

I have in mind that the project sponsor will be hiring according to that staffing
pattern.

What is your next question?

Crystal



Dear Crystal,
Thanks, and yes, I can already tell where I can use those levels to
defuse some meetings.

It strikes me, suddenly, that you have not said much about tools up
to now. I sense there is more here than you have let on, and that it
is actually rather important.

Regards, Alistair




June 8: Dear Alistair,

Yes, tooling deserves special mention[7].

Clear does not mandate any particular tools, just as it does not mandate any
specific technique. That is because the tools differ in various technologies.

That having been said, there is one tool that gets mentioned by almost every
team I visit, including even the smallest teams of three people: the
configuration management tool.

A startling number of teams I visit don't have any configuration management
system in place at all. Those are not the successful teams I am documenting,
however. The absence of configuration management doesn't imply the project
will fail, but successful teams almost unanimously name their configuration
management tool as the single most important tool they possess.

Crystal



Dear Crystal,

Last hard questionWhat would it mean for a group to say they are "in
compliance" with this methodology?

Alistair




June 9: Dear Alistair,

Compliance is a funny thing. On the one hand, we want enough compliance
that the project is safe, and not so much that people get uptight about the
details, as well as guidance to teams interested in setting up their projects to
succeed, work efficiently, and be "habitable" at the same time.

Compliance to methodologies is a graduated incline. Imagine, if you will, a
mesa, a flat plateau above some plains. But imagine that instead of a cliff from
the plains to the mesa, there is a sloped incline.

The mesa at the top is "obviously compliant." There is a certain amount of
room for movement, all safely within both the letter and intention of the
methodology.

The slope is the transition zone, the gray area of compliance, "Are we
compliant? It's not the letter of the methodology, but is it in the intention?"

A methodology description should say something about the transition zone,
otherwise there will be incessant bickering about the letter versus the
intention of the methodology. It should say something about, "Here's what it
takes to say you are safe; here are some things you can do and still say you're
doing (or sort of doing) it; do these and you are definitely out."

The dividing line on the sloping part will never be perfectly clear, but there
should be some way of telling the shift between the three zones. This allows
people to say, "Gee, we are doing everything just as described, and it's still
not working" or "Oh, I see. We forgot that critical part. Let's try that and see if
it all works better."

Accordingly, here is what it takes to say you are using Crystal Clear. Because
these are great, I start each with a smiley face :-)

   1. :-) You have short, rich communication paths. You are sitting very
      close together, preferably in one big room. You might be sitting in
      adjacent rooms if there are really only 46 of you and you visit each other
      a lot. Recognize that the quality of communication drops the moment
      you have to pick up the phone or walk out the door.

   2. :-) You deliver increments monthly or every other month,
      absolutely no longer than three months apart. You schedule and
      track code execution milestones, and not by document completion
      milestones.

   3. :-) You have a real user on the project, even if only part time.
      Your user helps you construct your screen sketches and both validates
      and breaks your UI designs. You get the system reviewed by real users
      at least once per increment prior to delivering it.

   4. :-) You have a project mission statement. You use one of a wide
      variety of requirements formats. You have a description of the system
      design (using one of the many description techniques you can invent).

   5. :-) You have a clear ownership model for your work products. For
      each class, module, or use case, you know who it is that can change or,
      more importantly, delete parts of it. The answer may be either a single
      person, anyone in a given subteam, or even anyone on the team (this is
      the rule in XP projects). You should never have to have the whole team
      sit around the screen and ask, "Who put this in here? What is it doing
      there? Can we delete it?" If you have to do this, you know you have a
      breakdown in the ownership model.
Here are some things you can vary and still say you are doing Clear. Because
these are still okay, I start each with a neutral face :-|

  1. :-| You sit in adjacent rooms, if there are really only 46 of you and
     you visit each other a lot. Recognize that the quality of communication
     drops the moment you have to pick up the phone or walk out the door.

  2. :-| You use the Scrum backlog technique or XP's planning game
     for prioritizing and scheduling your work (Schwaber 2002; Beck 2000). I
     personally like to use the blitz-planning (also known as the project-
     planning jam session) technique. The point I wish to make here is that
     Crystal Clear allows borrowing from other methodologies. Using XP's
     planning game does not mean you are not doing Crystal Clear. It only
     means that incorporating elements of other methodologies is a natural
     part of Crystal Clear.

  3. :-| There is only one iteration per delivery, but you arrange
     several user viewings. When the users see the system, they will
     comment, which will generate new work to be put into the delivery cycle.
     That feedback is crucial to product success. "Iterations" provide closure
     and velocity information, but so do short delivery cycles. Nothing
     replaces the user viewings, though.

  4. :-| Your users cannot accept operational increments as often as you
     produce them, or they can't accept partial functionality. So, you deliver
     tested, delivery-ready code to a "staging station" where the
     increments are added together over time until it is suitable to deliver
     them to the end users.

  5. :-| You describe your design using hypertext documents and
     technical memos and avoid UML drawings, or you describe classes
     using UML or one of the -OOM notations, and avoid responsibility
     statements. You document your system using videos of the
     designers walking through the design. There are lots of variations for
     how to describe the design (we aren't even close to figuring out the best
     way). If you don't like my use case format, you can come up with
     your own requirements format (possibly user stories or feature lists).
     With most of the work products, equivalent substitution is permitted as
     long as the intention of the item is preserved and the project's safety
     properties are not in jeopardy.

Here are some things that, if you are doing them, you are definitely outside of
Clear. Your rule set might work for you, but it is not Crystal Clear. I start each
with a frowny face :-(

  1. :-( You work in different buildings or different cities. This means
     your communications paths are long and thin, that you must
     communicate by phone, e-mail, or occasional visits. You cannot fulfill the
     requirements of Crystal Clear, which requires that team members be able
     to initiate and carry person-to-person conversations many times a day
     with little effort. Longer distances raise the barrier to conversation, the
     form of communication is inferior, and you cannot rely on the common
     shared memory of the group. (I note, as you probably do, that working
     on different floors of the same building falls in a gray zone in these
     descriptions. I doubt you can make Clear work properly across floors. I
     think you can't make it work properly even down a corridor. But I leave
     myself open to disproof-by-example.)

  2. :-( Your increments are longer than four months. Your feedback
     path is too long. You can no longer avoid "promissory notes" types of
     documents because you are not delivering often enough to demonstrate
     the progress you are making. Shorter increments is a critical success
     factor to your project (see Surviving Object Oriented Projects), no matter
     what methodology you are using.

  3. :-( There is no user viewing prior to delivery. My experience is that
     this means the users will be given something that doesn't meet their
     needs, too late to make changes. Even projects doing everything else on
     the Crystal Clear list, who miss this, end up in trouble when the users
     finally do see the system.

  4. :-( There are no real users available to your team. The hazard being
     addressed here is that the user requirements are coming from some sort
     of intermediary, a marketing representative or executive who promises
     they are telling you what the users "really" want. Research indicates that
     this sort of user input is unreliable, and direct links to real users are
     needed.

There is one part of Clear that is between optional and mandatory: use of a
fully automated regression test harness and test suites for unit and acceptance
tests. It gets the question mark (?) symbol.

  1. ? There are no automated test suites. Many systems have
     successfully shipped without automatic test suites. Really successful
     people, on the other hand, repeatedly say that the test suites give them
     speed and comfort in improving and debugging the system, and are high
     on their priority list. These days, speed in altering code is dependent on
     having automated test suites available, and more teams are using test-
     driven development (Beck 2003) to do even better.

     Teams using automated tests find they can update the design of the code
     with great freedom: They retest their work at the push of a button,
     discovering whether they introduced a new bug. Avoiding introducing
     new bugs when removing old ones is one of the best ways to improve
     and shorten project delivery times.

     Without regression testing, making changes to the system becomes
     tedious and unreliable, unreliable enough that one of two bad things
     happen: the team makes the change and introduces new errors, or they
     don't make the change, and allows the code to grow unnaturally complex
     ("crufty" is a word often used for such code).

     Why is automated regression testing optional in Crystal Clear if it is so
     great?
     The answer is that automated regression tests are not actually required
     to have a project success. It makes the team's life easier and it makes
     the code more malleable, but I have seen and participated in many
     projects that succeeded without using fully automated regression test
     suites.

     Since Crystal Clear is proposed as a high-tolerance methodology, I have
     to leave automated regression testing as optional. At a personal level, I
     can say that the best programmers I have met use them, and
     recommend them highly . . . but not using them does not mean the
     project will fail, and so is not a basis for saying a group is not using
     Crystal Clear.

So there you have it. What it takes to be safely inside Clear, what you can
vary, and what it takes to be outside.

Whew, I'm exhausted! How much more do you want from me?

Crystal



Dear Crystal,

I promise this is the last questionrefresh for me what Crystal Clear is
trying to be and why it works?

Alistair




June 10: Dear Alistair,

Summarizing . . .

Crystal Clear aims to be a simple and tolerant set of rules that puts the project
into the safety zone. It is, if you will, the least methodology that could
possibly work, because it contains so much tolerance.

The entire Crystal family has been described as consisting of

     Frequent Deliveries

     Reflective Improvement

     Close Communication

Crystal Clear pushes that last one up to Osmotic Communication.
Core to all of the Crystal family are a couple of ideas. One is that intermediate
work products and "promissory notes" such as detailed requirements
documents, design documents, and project plans might not be eliminated, but
they can be reduced to the extent that

     Short, rich, informal communication paths are available to the team.

     Working, tested software is delivered early and frequently.

Another is that the amount of detail needed in the requirements, design, and
planning documents varies with the project circumstances, specifically

     The extent of damage that might be caused by undetected defects

     The frequency of personal collaboration

Finally, the team reflects and adjusts its working conventions on the fly to fit

     The personalities on the team

     The local working environment

     The current assignment

The reason Crystal Clear works is that the people involved are professionals
led by someone who is supposed to be a Level-3 developer. With rich, low-cost
communications between them, the team members will diagnose most of their
own problems. If they are given access to users and deliver running code
every month or two, they get feedback on what they are doing. If they are not
interrupted too often, they will make progress. In other words, the project is
likely to work.

Note that Crystal Clear does not aim be the most productive, rigorous, or
scalable methodology in addition to its goal of being simple, tolerant, and
successful. People are welcome to adopt more disciplined development habits
as they choose, including a full-time user, pair programming, test-driven
development, and fully automated regression tests.

They are, however, unlikely to be able to drop any of the rules of Crystal Clear
and still be safe.

Crystal Clear comes with an important truth-in-advertising clause: Eight
people or less, collocated, not a life-critical system. Distributed teams need
other forms of communication, larger teams need more coordination, and
teams working on life-critical systems need more verification procedures in
place. Those teams will have to find another methodology, or tune Crystal
Clear upward to fit their needs.
I think this closes off our discussion.

Best wishes,

Crystal

   [1] The software product Pixid removes glares from digital whiteboard photos.


   [2] See Chapter 5.


   [3] Placing their screens about 18 inches apart, they each work on their own programming tasks.


   [4] See the auditor's analysis in Chapter 8.


   [5] These date back to the early days of Japanese Noh theater.


   [6] http://AgileManifesto.org


   [7] Tools deserve a complete article (Cockburn 2004e).
Chapter 2. Applied (The Seven Properties)
Reading how Crystal Clear works raises two particular questions:

  "What are these people concentrating on while they work?"

  "Can we get farther into the safety zone?"

This chapter describes seven properties set up by the best teams. Crystal Clear
requires the first three. Better teams use the other four properties to get farther
into the safety zone. All of the properties aside from Osmotic Communication apply
to projects of all sizes.

I only recently awoke to the realization that top consultants trade notes about the
properties of a project rather than on the procedures followed. They inquire after
the health of the project: Is there a mission statement and a project plan? Do they
deliver frequently? Are the sponsor and various expert users in close contact with
the team?

Consequently, and in a departure from the way in which a methodology is usually
described, I ask Crystal Clear teams to target key properties for the project. "Doing
Crystal Clear" becomes achieving the properties rather than following procedures.
Two motives drive this shift from procedures to properties:

       The procedures may not produce the properties. Of the two, the properties are
       the more important.

       Other procedures than the ones I choose may produce the properties for your
       particular team.

The Crystal family focuses on the three properties Frequent Delivery, Close
Communication, and Reflective Improvement[1] because they should be found on all
projects. Crystal Clear takes advantage of small team size and proximity to
strengthen close communication into the more powerful osmotic communication.
Aside from that one shift, experienced developers will notice that all the properties I
outline in this chapter apply to every project, not just small-team projects.

  [1] Thanks to Jens Coldewey of Germany for pointing this out to me!



By describing Crystal Clear as a set of properties, I hope to reach into the feeling of
the project. Most methodology descriptions miss the critical feeling that separates a
successful team from an unsuccessful one. The Crystal Clear team measures its
condition by the team's mood and the communication patterns as much as by the
rate of delivery. Naming the properties also provides the team with catch phrases to
measure their situation by: "We haven't done any reflective improvement for a
while." "Can we get more easy access to expert users?" The property names
themselves help people diagnose and discuss ways to fix their current situation.
PROPERTY 1. FREQUENT DELIVERY
The single most important property of any project, large or small, agile or not, is
that of delivering running, tested code to real users every few months. The
advantages are so numerous that it is astonishing that any team doesn't do it:

     The sponsors get critical feedback on the rate of progress of the team.

     Users get a chance to discover whether their original request was for what
     they actually need and to get their discoveries fed back into development.

     Developers keep their focus, breaking deadlocks of indecision.

     The team gets to debug their development and deployment processes and
     gets a morale boost through accomplishments.

All of these advantages come from one single property: frequent delivery. In my
interviews, I have not seen any period longer than four months that still offers this
safety. Two months is safer. Teams deploying to the Web may deliver weekly.

  Have you delivered running, tested, and usable code at least twice to your
  user community in the last six months?



Just what does "delivery" mean?

Sometimes it means that the software is deployed to the full set of users at the end
of each iteration for production use. This may be practical with Web-deployed
software or when the user group is relatively small.

When the users cannot accept software updates that often, the team finds itself in a
quandary. If they deliver the system frequently, the user community will get
annoyed with them. If they don't deliver frequently, they may miss a real problem
with integration or deployment. They will encounter that problem when it is very
late, that is, at the moment of deploying the system.

The best strategy I know of in this situation is to find a friendly user who doesn't
mind trying out the software, either as a courtesy or out of curiosity. Deploy to that
one workstation, for trial (not production) usage. This allows the team to practice
deployment and get useful feedback from at least one user.

If you cannot find a friendly user to deliver to, at least perform a full integration and
test as though you were going to. This leaves only deployment with a potential flaw.


The terms integration, iteration, user viewing, and release get mixed together these
days. They have different effects on development and should be considered
separately.

Frequent integration should be the norm, happening every hour, every day, or, at
the worst, every week. The better teams these days have continuously running
automated build-and-test scripts, so there is never more than 30 minutes from a
check-in until the automated test results are posted.

Simply performing a system integration doesn't constitute an iteration, since an
integration is often performed after any single person or subteam completes as a
fragment of a programming assignment. The term iteration refers to the team
completing a section of work, integrating the system, reporting the outcome up the
management chain, doing their periodic reflective improvement (I wish), and, very
importantly, getting emotional closure on having completed the work. The closure
following an iteration is important because it sets up an emotional rhythm,
something that is important to us as human beings.

In principle, an iteration can be anywhere from an hour to three months. In
practice, they are usually two weeks to two months long.

The end date of an iteration is usually considered immovable, a practice called "time
boxing." People encounter a natural temptation to extend an iteration when the
team falls behind. This has generally shown itself to be a bad strategy, as it leads to
longer and longer extensions to the iteration, jeopardizing the schedule and
demotivating the team. Many well-intentioned managers damage a team by
extending the iteration indefinitely, robbing the team of the joy and celebration
around completion.

A better strategy is to fix the end date and have the team deliver whatever they
have completed at the end of the time box. With this strategy, the team learns what
it can complete in that amount of time, useful feedback to the project plan. It also
supplies the team with an early victory.

Fixed-length iterations allow the team to measure their speed of movementthe
project's velocity. Fixed lengths iterations give that rhythm to the project that
people describe as the project's "heartbeat."

Some people lock the requirements during an iteration or time box. This gives the
team peace of mind while they develop, assuring them they will not have to change
directions, but can complete something at least. I once encountered a group trying
out XP where the customer didn't want the trial to succeed. This customer changed
the requirements priorities every few days so that after several iterations the team
still had not managed to complete any one user story. In such hostile environments,
both the requirements locking and the peace-of-mind are critical. Requirements
locking is rarely needed in well-behaved environments.

The results of an iteration may or may not get released. Just how often the software
should be sent out to real users is a topic for the whole team, including the sponsor,
to deliberate. They may find it practical to deliver after every iteration, they may
deliver every few iterations, or they may match deliveries to specific calendar dates.

Frequent delivery is about delivering the software to users, not merely iterating.
One nervous project team I visited had been iterating monthly for almost a year, but
not yet delivered any release. The people were getting pretty nervous, because the
customer hadn't seen what they had been working on for the last year! This
constitutes a violation of frequent delivery.

If the team cannot deliver the system to the full user base every few months, user
viewings become all the more critical. The team needs to arrange for users to visit
the team and see the software in action, or at least one user to install and test the
software. Failure to hold these user viewings easily correlates to end failure of the
project, when the users finally, and too late, identify that the software does not
meet their needs.

For the best effect, exercise both packaging and deployment. Install the system in
as close to a real situation as possible.
PROPERTY 2. REFLECTIVE IMPROVEMENT
The discovery that took me completely by surprise was that a project can reverse its
fortunes from catastrophic failure to success if the team will get together, list what
both is and isn't working, discuss what might work better, and make those changes
in the next iteration. In other words, reflect and improve. The team does not have
to spend a great deal of time doing this workan hour every few weeks or month will
do. Just the fact of taking time out of the helter-skelter of daily development to
think about what could work better is already effective.

  Did you get together at least once within the last three months for a half hour,
  hour, or half day to compare notes, reflect, discuss your group's working
  habits, and discover what speeds you up, what slows you down, and what you
  might be able to improve?



The project that gave me the surprise was Project Ingrid (described in Surviving
Object-Oriented Projects (Cockburn 1998)). At the end of the first iterationwhich
was supposed to be four months long, but they had extendedthey were far behind
schedule, demoralized, and with what they recognized as an unacceptable design. It
was what they did next that surprised me: They released twenty-three of the
twenty-four client-side programmers to go back to their old jobs, hired twenty-three
new people, changed the team and management structures, paid for several weeks
of programmer training, and started over, requiring the new group to redo the work
of the first team and make additional progress.

At the end of the second iteration, they again were behind schedule but had a
design that would hold, and the team structure and programmers were functioning.
They held another reflection workshop, made additional changes, and continued.

When I interviewed them, they were in their fourth iteration, ahead of schedule and
content with their design and their work practices.

Since that interview, I have noticed that most of the projects I have visited got off
to a rough start or encountered a catastrophe early on. This is so common that I
have come to expect, almost even welcome it: from that first catastrophe come all
sorts of new and important information about the project's working environment,
which would be deadly, but hidden.

  On Project Winifred we managed at the end of the first three-month delivery
  cycle what I called a "bubble-gum" release (the system was just barely held
  together by the software equivalent of bubble-gum). However, we delivered
  something every three months, getting better and better each time until we
  finally delivered the contracted function on time.

  After each delivery, a few of us got together. We identified what wasn't
  working and discussed ways to fix it. We kept trying new strategies until we
  found ones that worked. Frequent delivery and reflective improvement became
  critical success factors to us as they are to so many projects.



The people, the technology, and the assignment change over the course of a
project. The conventions the team uses need to change to match.

The people on the team are the best equipped to say what is best suited to their
situation, which is why Crystal Clear leaves so many details unstated, but for the
team to finalize. The reflective improvement mechanism allows them to make those
adjustments.

Every few weeks, once a month, or twice per delivery cycle, the people get together
in a reflection workshop or iteration retrospective to discuss how things are working.
They note the conventions they will keep and the ones they want to alter for the
next period, and they post those two lists prominently for the team members to see
while working in the next iteration.

Whatever the frequency, meeting format, and technique used, successful teams
hold this discussion periodically and try out new ideas. Teams may try, in various
forms: pair programming, unit testing, test-driven-development, single-room versus
multiple room seating, various levels of customer involvement, and even differing
iteration lengths. These are all proper variations within Crystal Clear.

For people to say they are using Crystal Clear, it is not necessary that they continue
to use the starter conventions. In fact, it is expected that they will try new ideas. In
a Crystal user group meeting, people discuss what they had experimented with, how
they felt about those experiments, and how they evolved their working conventions.
One team may report moving the meetings from every two weeks to every month,
another moving from the format I describe in Chapter 3 to a straight discussion of
people's values while developing.

I like to use the reflection workshop described in Chapter 3. Norm Kerth's (2001)
book, Project Retrospectives, presents an extended format, along with many
activities to try within the workshop. The specifics of the workshop format aren't
nearly as significant as the fact that the team is holding one.
PROPERTY 3. OSMOTIC COMMUNICATION
Osmotic communication means that information flows into the background hearing
of members of the team, so that they pick up relevant information as though by
osmosis. This is normally accomplished by seating them in the same room. Then,
when one person asks a question, others in the room can either tune in or tune out,
contributing to the discussion or continuing with their work. Several people have
related their experience of it much as this person did:

  We had four people doing pair programming. The boss walked in and asked my
  partner a question. I started answering it, but gave the wrong name of a
  module. Nancy, programming with Neil, corrected me, without Neil ever
  noticing that she had spoken or that a question had been asked.

When osmotic communication is in place, questions and answers flow naturally and
with surprisingly little disturbance among the team.

Osmotic communication and frequent delivery facilitate such rapid and rich feedback
that the project can operate with very little other structure.

  Does it take you 30 seconds or less to get your question to the eyes or ears of
  the person who might have the answer? Do you overhear something relevant
  from a conversation among other team members at least every few days?



Osmotic communication is the more powerful version that small projects can attain
of close communication, a property core to the entire Crystal family. Osmotic
communication makes the cost of communications low and the feedback rate high,
so that errors are corrected extremely quickly and knowledge is disseminated
quickly. People learn the project priorities and who holds what information. They
pick up new programming, design, testing, and tool handling tricks. They catch and
correct small errors before they grow into larger ones.

Although osmotic communication is valuable for larger projects, it is, of course,
increasingly difficult to attain as the team size grows.

It is hard to simulate osmotic communication without having the people in the same
room; however, adjacent rooms with two or three people in each confers many of
the benefits. Herring (2001) reported the use of high-speed intranet with Web
cameras, microphones, and chat sessions to trade questions and code, to simulate
the single room to (some) extent. With good technology, teams can achieve some
approximation of close communication for some purposes, but I have yet to see
osmotic communication achieved with other than physical proximity between team
members.


Discussion of osmotic communication inevitably leads to discussion about office
layout and office furniture.
Crystal Clear needs people to be very close to each other so that they overhear
useful information and get questions answered quickly. The obvious way to do this is
to put everyone into a single room ("war room"; see Figure 2-1), repeatedly shown
as being very effective (Olson 2000).


      Figure 2-1. Osmotic communication. (Courtesy of Tomax)




Many people who have private offices resist moving into a group space. However,
you can sometimes turn lemons into lemonade (so to speak) with this move:

  Lise was informed by her management that her department would have to
  reduce the number of square feet they used. This meant giving up private
  offices. She suggested that her people work together and design their own
  office spaces, three to five people in a combined area. The groups put fewer
  square feet around each work table so they could allocate space for additional
  areas with chairs, a sofa, or, in some cases, their own meeting rooms.

Figures 2-2 and 2-3 show what one group came up with. Note that although they
had fewer square feet per person than before, they ended up with longer sight lines
and a conversation area with soft chairs.


          Figure 2-2. Floor plan. (Courtesy of Schlumberger)
   Figure 2-3. Photo of same office. (Courtesy of Schlumberger)




Figure 2-4 shows the small meeting room one group put on the side of their shared
office. They used it to talk without disturbing whoever was still programming, and
also to leave their design notes and plans up on the wall.
 Figure 2-4. Group work room attached to shared office. (Courtesy
                        of Schlumberger)




Lise's group used the usual office furniture: concave, designed to have the fat CRT
back into the corner. This sort of table presents a disadvantage to an agile
development team, because it is hard for a second or third person to see the screen.
The war room in Figure 2-1 may look less glamorous, but there is a utility in those
ugly tables: People can congregate around a screen; pairs of people can work
together easily. It is for this reason that agile development teams prefer straight
tables, or even better, tables that bulge outward toward the typist.

If you set up a war room work area, be sure to arrange another place for people to
go to unwind and do their private e-mail. This allows people to focus when they step
into the common area and find a bit of relief from the pressure by stepping out.
Such an arrangement is referred to as a "caves and common" arrangement.

One project team got permission to set up a common discussion area with soft
chairs and sofa (Figure 2-5). On the wall in front of the chairs is the ever-present
whiteboard with whiteboard capture device. This is where the team adjourned to
hold their group design discussions, iteration planning meetings, and reflection
workshops.


Figure 2-5. Group discussion area. (Courtesy of Darin Cummins and
                      ADP's Dealer Services)
Agile Software Development (Cockburn 2002) contains additional information on
"convection currents" of information flow within a group, osmotic communication,
the value of colocation, and examples of office layout.


Osmotic communication generates its own hazards, most commonly noise and a
flow of questions to the team's most expert developer. People usually self-regulate
here and request less idle chit-chat or more respect for think time.

Attempting to "protect" the lead designer with a private office usually backfires.
That person really needs to be sitting in the middle of the development team. The
lead designer is often the technology expert, a domain expert, and the best
programmer, and so is necessarily in high demand. When she is taken away, the
younger developers miss the chance to develop good development habits, miss
growing in the domain and the technology, and make mistakes that otherwise would
get caught very quickly. The cost to the project ends up being greater than the
benefit of quiet time to the lead designer. Having the lead designer in the same
room as the rest of the team is a strategy called Expert in Earshot (Cockburn url
eie), a special use of osmotic communication. (Andrews url) has a blog entry about
creating such a seating arrangement accommodating twenty people.

Even the best success property is unsuitable under certain circumstances. Osmotic
communication is no exception. If the lead designer gets so overloaded and so
frequently interrupted as to be unable to make progress on anything, the lead
designer needs a workplace with no interruptions at all and extremely limited
communications with the team, a Cone of Silence, I call it. Many lead designers use
the hours from 6:00 P.M. to 2:00 A.M. as their cone of silence, but it is better for all
involved if an acceptable cone of silence can be set up within normal working hours.
The cone of silence strategy is described in detail in (Cockburn 2003b).
PROPERTY 4. PERSONAL SAFETY
Personal safety is being able to speak when something is bothering you, without
fear of reprisal. It may involve telling the manager that the schedule is unrealistic, a
colleague that her design needs improvement, or even letting a colleague know that
she needs to take a shower more often. Personal safety is important, because with
it the team can discover and repair its weaknesses. Without it, people won't speak
up, and the weaknesses will continue to damage the team.

Personal safety is an early step toward trust. Trust, which involves giving someone
else power over oneself, with accompanying risk of personal damage, is the extent
to which one is comfortable with handing that person the power. Some people trust
others by default, and wait to be hurt before withdrawing the trust. Others are
disinclined to trust others, and wait until they see evidence that they won't be hurt
before they give the trust. Presence of trust is positively correlated with team
performance (Costa 2002).

The different ways in which one can be hurt lead to different forms of trust and
distrust (Mishra 1996). A person lacking open honesty might lie or conceal. One who
lacks congruence in actions will be inconsistent. A person lacking either competence
or reliability will fail to complete assignments. A person lacking concern for others
may act to damage them, including giving away sensitive information.

Accepting exposure to these varied potential damages is using different forms of
trust. It is neither realistic nor necessary to ask everyone on a project to trust each
other in all forms. It is important that people can speak and act freelythey need to
trust each other with respect to damaging actions and betrayal.

When there is no evidence of betrayal or damage, people will reveal information
more freely, which will speed the project. Therefore, personal safety is the critical
property to attain.

  Can you tell your boss you mis-estimated by more than 50 percent, or that
  you just received a tempting job offer? Can you disagree with your boss about
  the schedule in a team meeting? Can people end long debates about each
  other's designs with friendly disagreement?



Establishing trust involves being in a situation where one of those dangers is
present and seeing that the other people do not hurt you. In other words, to build
trust, there must be exposure.

Three particular exposures are relevant in software development:

     Revealing one's ignorance

     Revealing a mistake
     Revealing one's incapability on an assignment

Skillful leaders expose their team members (and themselves!) to these situations
early, and then demonstrate with speed and authenticity that not only will damage
not accrue, but also that the leader and the team as a whole will act to support the
person.

  One project leader[2] told me that when a new person joined her team, she
  would visit that person privately to discuss his work and progress, and wait for
  the inevitable moment when he had to admit he hadn't done or didn't know
  something.

  This was the crucial moment to her, because until he revealed a weakness, she
  couldn't demonstrate to him that she would cover for him or get him
  assistance. She knew she was not going to get both reliable information and
  full cooperation from him until he understood properly that when he revealed a
  weakness or mistake, he would actually get assistance. She said that some
  people got the message after her first visit, while others needed several
  demonstrations before opening up.

     [2] Thanks to Victoria Einarsson in Sweden.



Another project leader told of building cohesion and safety in the team by having
the group work together to solve a difficult problem they were facing. In solving the
problem together, they learned several things:

     First, they wouldn't get hurt if they admitted ignorance, even in their own
     area.

     Second, they learned how to interpret each other's mannerisms as
     nonthreatening, even in heavy argument.

     Finally, they learned that together they could solve things they couldn't solve
     alone.

Trust is enhanced with frequent delivery. When the software is delivered, people
recognize who did their share of the work and who shirked, who told the truth, who
damaged or protected whom, and who, despite their superficial manners, could be
trusted along which dimensions. With personal safety, they speak from their heart
during the reflective improvement sessions.


Personal safety goes hand in hand with amicability, the willingness to listen with
goodwill. The project suffers when any one person on the team stops listening with
goodwill, or loses the inclination to pass along possibly important information. In
addition to personal skill, a project's forward progress relies only on the speed of
movement of information across people ("meme-meters per minute," if you will).
Usually one person on the team sets the lead in amicability. On a larger project, it is
often crucially the project manager. On a Crystal Clear project, it can be anyone on
the team. Unless there is a specific reason countering it, amicability spreads quickly
and makes the team more comfortable in exchanging information quickly. Personal
safety and amicability together help lead to collaboration across organizational
boundaries, the establishment of global lifelines for the project. I set amicability as
significant management element on a project, partly as evidence for personal
safety.

Once personal safety and amicability are established, a useful, playful dynamic may
emerge. People may wage competition with each other. They may argue loudly,
even to the verge of fighting, without taking it personally. In the case where
someone does take it personally, they sort it out and set things straight again.

Be careful, though, not to confuse personal safety with politeness. Some teams
appear to have personal safety in place, but actually are just being polite because
they are unwilling to show disagreement.[3] Covering their disagreements with
politeness and conciliation, they don't detect and repair mistakes that are present.
This damages the project in the end, as in the case of overamicability described in
Agile Software Development (Cockburn 2002, p. 101).

  [3] Thanks to Kay Johanssen for this distinction.



There is a fair amount of literature on the subject of trust, some of which you may
find applicable to your situation. Read more in Hohmann (1997), Kramer (1996),
Costa (2002), and Adams (2002).
PROPERTY 5. FOCUS
Focus is first knowing what to work on, and then having time and peace of mind to
work on it. Knowing what to work on comes from communication about goal
direction and priorities, typically from the executive sponsor. Time and peace of
mind come from an environment where people are not taken away from their task
to work on other, incompatible things.

  Do all the people know what their top two priority items to work on are? Are
  they guaranteed at least two days in a row and two uninterrupted hours each
  day to work on them?



Even with the best of intentions, developers will work on things that only randomly
bring business value if they are not told what will provide business value. It is the
job of the executive sponsor, starting from the project chartering activity and
running continuously throughout the project, to make it clear to everyone where the
organization's priorities lie.

The vice president of a fifty-person company sat down one night, prioritized the
seventy pending company initiatives, and announced the results to her managers
the following day. She went around to each developer individually and made sure
they each knew the top two items for them.

One lead designer I met kept the project's mission statement and priorities posted
on the wall and referred to them regularly.

Just knowing what is important isn't enough. Developers regularly report that
meetings, requests to give demos, and demands to fix run-time bugs keep them
from completing their work. It quite typically takes a person about twenty minutes
and considerable mental energy to regain her train of thought after one of these
interruptions. When the interruptions happen three or four times a day, it is not
uncommon for the person to simply idle between interruptions, feeling that it is not
worth the energy to get deeply into a train of thought when the next distraction will
just show up in the middle of it.

People asked to work on two or three projects at the same time regularly report that
they are unable to make progress on any one project. It seems to take an hour and
a half for a person to regain the train of thought after working on a different project.

Among the experienced project managers that I interview, the consensus is that
about one and one-half projects is the most that a person can be on and stay
effective. By the time a third project is added, the developer becomes ineffective on
all three. Contrast this with the inexperienced managers who, underestimating the
cost of switching between projects, assign developers to work on three to five
projects at the same time. I encountered one developer assigned to seventeen
projects simultaneously! You can imagine that he barely had time to report at the
various meetings his ongoing lack of progress on all fronts.
The repair is simple, though uncomfortable. The sponsor makes it clear which
projects and work items are top priority for each person, and arranges for the top
two items to be distinctly higher in priority than all the rest.

The team should then adopt conventions that provide focus time for the team
members. One such convention is that once a person starts working on a project,
that person is guaranteed at least two full days before having to switch to a second
project. This allows for some project switching, while guaranteeing the person
enough time to make actual progress instead of using all the time just to get back
up to speed on each project before leaving it again.

The next convention to adopt may be to localize distracting interruptions. My
experience is that it is generally impractical to bottle up interruptions to something
so neat and tidy as "mornings only" or "between 1 and 3 in the afternoon." It is in
the nature of interruptions to come sporadically and with high priority. What the
team can do is to create a two-hour time window during which interruptions are
blocked. There are very few interruptions that can't wait for two hours. Some teams
use from 10:00 to noon as a time when meetings, phone calls, and demos are not
allowed.

With two hours of guaranteed focus time each day, and two days in a row on the
same project, a developer who otherwise is being driven to distraction may get four
full hours of work done in a week. One developer who adopted these reported after
a few weeks that he had gotten more done in those few weeks than in the several
months before that.
PROPERTY 6. EASY ACCESS TO EXPERT USERS
Continued access to expert user(s) provides the team with

     A place to deploy and test the frequent deliveries

     Rapid feedback on the quality of their finished product

     Rapid feedback on their design decisions

     Up-to-date requirements

Researchers Keil and Carmel published results showing how critical it is to have
direct links to expert users (Keil 1995). Surveying managers who had worked both
with and without easy access to real users, they write

  . . . in 11 of the 14 paired cases, the more successful project involved a
  greater number of links than the less successful project. . . . This difference
  was found to be statistically significant in a paired t-test (p < 0.01).

Their research led them to a specific recommendation: "Reduce Reliance on Indirect
Links." In other words, get real access to real users.

  Does it take less than three days, on the average, from the time you come up
  with a question about system usage to when an expert user answers the
  question? Can you get the answer in a few hours?



All very nice, but how many users, and how much time?

Even one hour a week of access to a real and expert user is immensely valuable.
The more hours each week that an expert user is available to a team, the more
advantage they can take of that proximity. The first hour, however, is the most
crucial.

The other thing that is important is the length of time until a question gets
answered. If a question won't be answered for another three days, the
programmers are likely to put into the code their best current guess, and may forget
to recheck their decision when they are with the users again. Therefore, they should
have telephone access to the expert user during the week.

Here are the three user access methods I hear about most often:

     Weekly or semiweekly user meetings with additional phone calls. You may find
     that the user loads the team with information in the first weeks. Over time,
     the developers need less time from the user(s), as they develop code.
     Eventually, a natural rhythm forms, as the user provides new requirements
     information and also reviews draft software. This natural rhythm might involve
     one, two, or three hours a week per expert user. If you add a few phone calls
     during the week, then questions get answered quickly enough to keep the
     development team from going off in a false direction.

     One or more experienced users directly on the development team. This is only
     rarely possible, but don't discount it. I periodically find a team located inside
     the user community or is in some way collocated with an expert user.

     Send the developers to become trainee users for a period. Odd though this
     may sound, some development teams send the developers to either shadow
     users or become apprentice users themselves. While I don't have a very large
     base of stories to draw from, I have not yet heard a negative story related to
     using this strategy. The developers return with a respect for the users and an
     appreciation for the way their new software can change the working lives of
     the users.

Keil and Carmel name additional user links, including facilitated teams, user-
interface prototyping, interviews, tests, bulletin boards, usability labs, observational
study, and focus groups. In a quick search on the Internet, I turned up a number of
companies that specialize in finding subjects and testing software with real users.

I distinguish between the expert user and the business expert, because they are
often different people. The business expert knows the business policies, including
which are fixed, which are likely to change, and the dependencies between them.
Users generally don't know this information. On the other hand, the expert user
knows which operations are common and which are rare, what shortcuts are
needed, what information doesn't really have to be entered, and what information
needs to be visible at the same time. The business expert won't know this
information, since it comes only from continuous daily operation.

The development team will contain a business expert (see Roles in Chapter 5). That
person may be the sponsor, or the expert user, or it may be the lead designer. Such
a person is almost always available to a project, and so I don't fuss about it so
much. The expert user, on the other hand, is usually missing, to the detriment of
the project, which is why I fuss about it so much here. Easy access to expert users
provides a safety net for the team, as well as being a competitive advantage. It is
likely to be a critical success factor for a small team.


"Okay, we've got the usersnow what do we do with them?"

You need to know what they want, what their sponsors are willing to pay for, where
their fast and rare-but-significant usage patterns lie, whether you have overlooked
something critical. You need the users before, during, and after design.

Before you get too far into designing the system, you need to identify the user roles
that the sponsors consider the most important people to fit the application. These
are the focal roles. The system will present different "personalities" (e.g., fast and
efficient or warm and friendly) to each different role. The designers will accentuate
one personality over others, and you want to make sure they accentuate the most
important one(s).

The technique described in a section of the next chapter, Essential Interaction
Design, is one way to identify the focal roles and personalities to develop. The
attraction of this workshop technique is that you can gather the information in just a
few days.

During design, you will need answers to many small questions. For this you need
easy access to expert users on an ongoing basis as described in this section.

After design, when you think you are done, you need users again, to evaluate your
results. If the system will go to a few, local users, simply invite them in for a test
drive. If, on the other hand, you have a large number of geographically dispersed
users, then the cost of evaluation is greater. I don't know of any special efficiencies
for this situation. Techniques for usability evaluation have been described for
decades (customer focus groups and usability samples being the prime examples).

Before I leave this property, I ask you to read again the last paragraphs of the
frequent delivery, in which I describe the troubles arising from not arranging for real
user feedback. Even teams that do every other practice in agile development find
themselves facing catastrophic bad news at the end of the project if they neglect
such feedback during the project.
PROPERTY 7. TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENT WITH AUTOMATED
TESTS, CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT, AND FREQUENT
INTEGRATION
The elements I highlight in this property are such well-established core elements
that it is embarrassing to have to mention them at all. Let us consider them one at a
time and all together.

Automated Testing. Teams do deliver successfully using manual tests, so this
can't be considered a critical success factor. However, every programmer I've
interviewed who once moved to automated tests swore never to work without them
again. I find this nothing short of astonishing.

Their reason has to do with improved quality of life. During the week, they revise
sections of code knowing they can quickly check that they hadn't inadvertently
broken something along the way. When they get code working on Friday, they go
home knowing that they will be able on Monday to detect whether anyone had
broken it over the weekendthey simply rerun the tests on Monday morning. The
tests give them freedom of movement during the day and peace of mind at night.

Configuration Management. The configuration management system allows people
to check in their work asynchronously, back changes out, wrap up a particular
configuration for release, and roll back to that configuration later on when trouble
arises. It lets the developers develop their code both separately and together. It is
steadily cited by teams as their most critical noncompiler tool.

Frequent Integration. Many teams integrate the system multiple times a day. If
they can't manage that, they do it daily, or, in the worst case, every other day. The
more frequently they integrate, the more quickly they detect mistakes, the fewer
additional errors that pile up, the fresher their thoughts, and the smaller the region
of code that has to be searched for the miscommunication.

The best teams combine all three into continuous integration-with-test. They
catch integration-level errors within minutes.

  Can you run the system tests to completion without having to be physically
  present?

  Do all your developers check their code into the configuration management
  system?

     Do they put in a usful note about it as they check it in?

        Is the system integrated at least twice a week?
How frequent should frequent integration be? There is no fixed answer to this any
more than to the question of how long a development iteration should be.

One lead designer reported to me that he was unable to convince anyone on his
team to run the build more than three times a week. While he did not find this
comfortable, it worked for that project. The team used one-month-long iterations,
had osmotic communications, reflective improvement, configuration management,
and some automated testing in place. Having those properties in place made the
frequency of their frequent integration less critical.

The most advanced teams use a build-and-test machine such as Cruise Control[4] to
integrate and test nonstop (note: having this machine running is not yet sufficient .
. . the developers have to actually check in their code to the main line code base
multiple times a day!). The machine posts the test results to a Web page that team
members leave open on their screens at all times. One internationally distributed
development team (obviously not using Crystal Clear!) reports that this use of
Cruise Control allows the developers to keep abreast of the changing code base,
which to some extent mitigates their being in different time zones.

  [4] http://cruisecontrol.sourceforge.net/



Experiment with different integration frequency, and find the pace that works for
your team. Include this topic as part of your reflective improvement. For more on
configuration management, I refer you to Configuration Management Principles and
Practice (Hass 2003) Configuration Management Patterns (Berczuk 2003), and
Pragmatic Version Control using CVS by the Pragmatic Programmers (Thomas
2003). You may need to hire a consultant to come in for a few days, help set up the
configuration management system, and tutor the team on how to use it.


Automated testing means that the person can start the tests running, go away, not
having to intervene in or look at the screens, and then come back to find the test
results waiting. No human eyes and no fingers are needed in the process. Each
person's test suites can be combined into a very large one that can, if needed, be
run over the weekend (still needing no human eyes or fingers).

Three questions immediately arise about automated testing:

       At what level should they be written?

       How automated do they have to be?

       How quickly should they run?

Besides usability tests, which are best performed by people outside the project,[5] I
find three levels of tests hotly discussed:

  [5] Google even has a category for it: Computers > Human-Computer Interaction > Companies and Consultants > Usability Testing.
     Customer-oriented acceptance tests running in front of the GUI and relying on
     mouse and keyboard movements

     Customer-oriented acceptance tests running just behind the GUI, testing the
     actions of the system without needing a mouse or keyboard simulator

     Programmer-oriented function, class, and module tests (commonly called unit
     tests)

The automated tests that my interviewees are so enthusiastic over are from the
latter two of those categories. Automating unit tests allow the programmers to
check that their code hasn't accidentally broken out from under them while they are
adding new code or improving old code (refactoring). The GUI-less acceptance tests
do the same for the integrated system, and are stable over many changes in the
system's internal design. Although GUI-less acceptance tests are highly
recommended, I rarely find teams using them, for the reason that they require the
system architecture to carefully separate the GUI from the function. This is a
separation that has been recommended for decades, but few teams manage.

Automated GUI-driven system tests are not in the highly recommended short list
because they are costly to automate and must be rebuilt with every change of the
GUI. This difficulty makes it all the more important that the development team
creates an architecture that supports GUI-less acceptance tests.

A programmer's unit tests need to execute in seconds, not minutes. Running that
fast, the programmer will not lose her concentration while they run, which means
that the tests are actually run as the programmer works. If the tests take several
minutes to run, she is unlikely to rerun the tests after typing in just a few lines of
new code or moving two lines of code to a new function or class.

Tests may take longer when the code is checked into the configuration management
system. At this point, the programmer has completed a sequence of design actions,
and can afford to walk away for a few minutes while the tests run.

The acceptance tests can take a long time to run, if needed. I write this sentence
advisedly: The reason the tests run a long time should be because there are so
many tests or there is a complicated timing sequence involved, not because the test
harness is sloppy. Once again, if the tests run quickly, they will get run more often.
For some systems, though, the acceptance tests do need to run over the weekend.

Crystal Clear does not mandate when the tests get written. Traditionally,
programmers and testers write the tests after the code is written. Also traditionally,
they don't have much energy to write tests after they write code. Partially for this
reason, more and more developers are adopting test-driven development (Beck
2003).

The best way I know to get started with automated testing is to download a
language-specific copy of the X-unit test framework (where X is replaced by the
language name), invented by Kent Beck. There is JUnit for Java programmers,
CppUnit for C++ programmers, and so on for Visual Basic, Scheme, C, and even
PHP. Then get one of the books on test-driven development (Beck 2003, Astels
2003) and work through the examples. A Web search will turn up more resources on
X-unit.

Both httpUnit and Ward Cunningham's FIT (Framework for Integrated Tests) help
with GUI-less acceptance tests. The former is for testing HTML streams of Web-
based systems, the latter to allow the business expert to create her own test suites
without needing to know about programming. Robert Martin integrated FIT with
Ward's Wiki technology to create FITnesse.[6] Many teams use spreadsheets to allow
the business experts to easily type in scenario data for these system-function tests.

  [6] http://fit.c2.com and http://fitnesse.org respectively.



There are, sadly, no good books on designing the system for easy GUI-less
acceptance testing. The Mac made the idea of scriptable interfaces mainstream for a
short while (Simone url) and scripting is standard with Microsoft Office. In general,
however, the practice has submerged and is used by a relatively small number of
outstanding developers. The few people I know who could write these books are too
busy programming.


I end this section with a small testimonial to test-driven development that I hope
will sway one or two readers. Thanks to David Brady for this note:

  Yesterday I wrote a function that takes a variable argument, like printf(). That
  function decomposes the list arguments, and drops the whole mess onto a
  function pointer. The pointer points to a function on either the console
  message sink object or a kernel-side memory buffer message sink object.
  (This is just basic inheritance, but it's all gooky because I'm writing it in C.)

  Anyway, in the past I would expect a problem of that complexity to stall me for
  an indefinite amount of time while I tried to debug all the bizarre and
  fascinating things that can go wrong with a setup like that.

  It took me less than an hour to write the test and the code using test-first.

  My test was pretty simple, but coming up with it was probably the hardest part
  of the whole process. I finally decided that if my function returned the correct
  number of characters written (same as printf), that I would infer that the
  function was working.

  With the test in place, I had an incredible amount of focus. I knew what I had
  to make the code do, and there was no need to wander around aimlessly in
  the code trying to support every possible case. No, it was just "get this test to
  run." When I had the test running, I was surprised to realize that I was indeed
  finished. There wasn't anything extra to add; I was actually done!

  I usually cut 350400 lines of production-grade code on a good day. Yesterday I
  didn't feel like I had a particularly good day, but I cut 184 test LOC and 529
  production LOC, pLOC that I *know* works, because the tests tell me so,
pLOC that includes one of the top-10 trickiest things I've ever done in C (that
went from "no idea" to "fully functional" in under 60 minutes).

Wow. I'm sold.

Test infection. Give it a warm, damp place to start, and it'll do the rest. . . .

David Brady
EVIDENCE: COLLABORATION ACROSS ORGANIZATIONAL
BOUNDARIES
There is a side-effect from attending to personal safety, amicability within the team,
and easy access to expert users: it becomes natural to include other stakeholders
into the project, as well.

Géry Derbier, working with the French postal service (La Poste) to build software to
run a new facility to handle all the mail going into and out of northern France,
reported on his use of Crystal. With twenty-five people, his was a project in the
Crystal Yellow category. However, he knew the principles of the Crystal
methodologies family, particularly the "stretch to fit" principle, and therefore chose
to extend Crystal Clear to his larger setting wherever possible.

  We discussed his project, and at one point covered their project's linkage to
  the integration testing team located 30 km away and to the business and
  usage expert working for La Poste. I asked questions of the sort: "How often
  did that person visit the team? How did he feel about that? How did his
  manager feel about his coming over so often?" Géry's answers were, for both
  external groups: "One day a week; comfortable; happy to be involved so
  early."

After our discussion, I realized that Géry had built the additional safety of
collaboration across organizational boundaries into his project. His project was
happily linked into both the customer and integration environments with a colleague
on each end. La Poste's contract measured and paid according to integrated test
results every few months (frequent delivery). The La Poste executives got software
delivered in growing increments and paid accordingly. Géry's bosses, who had no
previous experience with incremental delivery, were happy about this also, since
they saw regular delivery turn into regular payments. Géry had a support structure
on all sides.

Collaboration across organizational boundaries is not a given result on any proj ect.
It results from working with honesty amicability and integrity within and outside the
team. It is hard to achieve if the team does not itself have personal safety and, to a
lesser extent, frequent delivery. I consider the presence of good collaboration across
organizational boundaries as partial evidence that some of the top seven safety
properties are being achieved.
REFLECTION ON THE PROPERTIES
I don't believe that any prescribed procedures exists that can assure that projects
land in the safety zone every time. Nor, with the exception of incremental
development, do I show up on a project with any particular set of rules in hand,
even though I have my favorites. This is why Crystal Clear is built around critical
properties instead of specification of procedures.

A Crystal team works to set the seven properties into place, using whatever group
conventions, techniques, and standards fit their situation. The conventions may vary
by project and by month. New techniques get invented with each new technology
(and usually go out of style again a few years later). These seven properties, on the
other hand, have been applied on good projects for decades.

My intention with Crystal is to not invade the natural workings of individuals on the
project where possible, and to allow the most possible variation across different
teams, while still getting those diverse projects into the safety zone. To allow
variation, I must remove constraints. Removing constraints means finding broader
mechanisms that provide a safety net. The ones I choose to rely on are these:

     People are by nature good at looking around and communicating.

     They take initiative when provided with information.

     They do better in an environment that is safe with respect to personal and
     emotional safety and particularly freedom from personal attacks.

     They do their best work if they can satisfy their need for contribution,
     accomplishment, and pride-in-work.

The Crystal Clear safety net is built on those things. Personal safety gives people the
personal courage to share whatever they discover. Osmotic communication gives
them the greatest chance to discover important information from each other and
does so with very low communication cost. Reflective improvement gives them a
channel to apply feedback to their working process. Easy access to expert users
gives them the opportunity to quickly discover relevant information from the
user(s). Frequent delivery creates feedback to the system's requirements and the
development process. The technical development environment including automated
tests, configuration management, and frequent integration allows people to safely
make changes to the system, synchronize the multiple minds that are in motion at
the same time, and get feedback on the system's intermediate stages quickly. Focus
allows the team to spend their energy well on the most important things.

Ron Jeffries once characterized Crystal Clear as, "Bring a few developers together in
peace, love and harmony, shipping code every other month, and good software will
emerge." He is close.
You should be asking at this point, "But what is special in all this about small
projects? Shouldn't all project teams set these properties in place?"

The answerwith two side notesis, "Of course." The properties that make a small-
team project successful should be very similar to making any project successful, but
should be optimized for the small-project situation.

The first note is that the properties are easier to reach on a small project. Personal
safety is easier, since the people interact with each other more often and come to
know each other sooner. The feedback loops are much smaller, and the rest of the
properties follow accordingly.

The second note is that osmotic communication, which lives from background
hearing and communication along lines-of-sight, really only works with small teams.
Larger teams will set up osmotic communication within subteams and close
communication across subteams.
Chapter 3. In Practice (Strategies and Techniques)
Crystal Clear does not require any one strategy or technique. It is good to have a
set in hand to get started, however. This chapter presents a few of the less well
documented and more significant ones used by modern agile development teams.

Many useful strategies and techniques have been named in the last decade, from
XP's "planning game" to Dave Thomas and Andy Hunt's "tracer bullets." The
Pragmatic Programmer (Hunt 1999), Extreme Programming Explained (Beck 1999),
and Refactoring (Fowler 1999) are particularly rich in ideas.

There are strategies and techniques not in those books that are useful to the Crystal
Clear team, particularly through the early months of the project. I include ones that
make a good starter set, are recommended by experienced developers, few people
seem to know, are simple, and, most of all, are useful.
THE STRATEGIES
The strategies I have selected to outline are

  1. Exploratory 360°, part of project chartering

  2. Early Victory, a project management strategy

  3. Walking Skeleton, a joint architecture/project management strategy

  4. Incremental Rearchitecture, a strategy related to Walking Skeleton

  5. Information Radiators, a strategy for communication


Strategy 1. Exploratory 360°

At the start of a new project, usually during the chartering activity, the team needs
to establish that the project is both meaningful and that they can deliver it using the
intended technology. They look around them in all directions, sampling the project's

     Business value

     Requirements

     Domain model

     Technology plans

     Project plan

     Team makeup

     Methodology or working conventions

They may check other aspects of the project, but these are the usual.

The entire Exploratory 360° for a Crystal Clear project takes a few days up to a
week or two if some new and peculiar technology is to be used. Based on what they
learn, the team decides whether it makes sense to proceed.


Business-value sampling consists of capturing, with key stakeholders, what the
system should do for its users and their organization(s). This should result in the
names of the key use cases for the system, along with the focal roles the system
should serve and the personalities and functions it should present to the world.
Requirements sampling consists of low-precision use cases that show what the
system must do, and with what other people and systems it will have to interact.
Often that drafting exercise turns up interfaces between organizations or technology
systems that had not formerly been identified.

Concurrently or from the use case drafts, the developers sample the domain model.
This sample serves to highlight the key concepts they will be working with, the core
of the business, the programming, and the discursive vocabulary. It also helps the
team to estimate the size and difficulty of the problem at hand.

The developers create a technology sampling, running a few experiments with the
technology. Ward Cunningham and Kent Beck call these spikes (see
http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?SpikeSolution). The assignment is to ask: Can we really
connect these technologies? Will they withstand the intended loads? Can our
developers master the technologies in time? The programmers perform the smallest
programming assignment needed to make it clear the project is not running down a
blind alley. The experiments establish the technical plausibility of the project.

The team creates a coarse-grained project plan, possibly from the project map or a
set of stories and releases. It might be done using the blitz-planning technique
described later in this chapter, or XP's planning game. This plan is reviewed by the
lead designer, the executive sponsor, and the expert user to make sure the project
is delivering suitable business value for suitable expense in a suitable time period.

Finally, the developers discuss their process, either in a Reflection Workshop or a
Process Miniature.


Here is the story of one project that failed three elements of the Exploratory 360°:

  During the technology sample, the developers found, much to their surprise,
  that they could not connect the organization's email system to their intranet
  and browser system. It was not clear how they could actually deliver the
  software services they had envisioned.

  The project planning sample showed the cost to be about three times higher
  than the executive sponsor was interested in spending.

  The business value sample showed that the organization should not allocate
  very many developer resources to this problem; it would be better outsourced
  (or simply bought), and the development team allocated to a more significant
  business problem.

You would think that canceling or outsourcing such a project would be obvious to all
involved. However, the developers were keen to experiment with the new
technology, and therefore kept the project alive, under the guise that this project
would serve as a good learning vehicle. Fortunately, the executive sponsors paid
attention to the exploratory 360° results, stopped the programmers, outsourced the
project, and put these key developers on a project of much greater value to the
organization (which, I am happy to add, they enjoyed much more).
Strategy 2. Early Victory

Winning is a force that binds a team and contributes to the self-confidence of its
members. Sociologist Karl Weick (1979) found that small wins helps a group
develop strength and confidence. Happily, these can be arranged relatively early in
the project, when the team badly needs them. This is the Early Victory strategy.

On software projects, the early victory to seek is the first piece of visibly running,
tested code. This is usually the walking skeleton (a tiny piece of usable system
function, very often not much more than the ability to add an item to the system
database and then look at it). Although this may not sound like much, team
members learn each others' working styles from this small win, users get an early
view of the system, and the sponsors see the team delivering.


Project teams often argue over the sequence in which to attack their problem. An
often-mentioned strategy is Worst Thing First. The reasoning is that once that worst
thing is out of the way, everything will be easier.

The problem with worst-thing-first is that if the team fails to deliver, the sponsor has
no idea where the failure lies: Is the team not good enough to pull off this project?
Is the technology wrong, or is the process wrong? In addition, the team members
may get depressed or start to argue with each other.

Since I often join teams that haven't worked together before and are tackling a new
problem with new technology, I prefer Easiest Thing First, Hardest Second. The
team members get to debug their communication and their process on a relatively
simple assignment. They and the sponsors get the confidence of an early victory. If
the most difficult problem is still outside the team's capabilities, I look for the
hardest thing the team can succeed with as the second task.

Once the risk of team and technical failure abates, a good strategy is Highest
Business Value First. This strategy not only generates maximum financial returns for
the project (Denne 2003) but also maps well-to-earned-value charts. [1] You can
show everyone you are delivering business value and not just work hours. If the
project should run out of time, it will be abundantly clear to the sponsors that they
got the best value for money in the time spent, useful in both friendly and hostile
circumstances.[2]

  [1] See p. 98.


  [2] See badly formed fixed-price project bids, on p. 301 and also (Patton 2003).




Strategy 3. Walking Skeleton

A walking skeleton is a tiny implementation of the system that performs a small
end-to-end function. It need not use the final architecture, but it should link
together the main architectural components. The architecture and the functionality
can then evolve in parallel.
I first learned of the walking skeleton idea when a project's lead designer
approached me for a conversation and described a project of his. He said
(approximately):

  We had a large project to do, consisting of systems passing messages around
  a ring to each other. The other technical lead and I decided that we should,
  within the first week, connect the systems together so they could pass a single
  null message around the ring. This way we at least had the ring working.

  We then required that at the end of every week, no matter what new
  messages and message processing was developed during the week, the ring
  had to be intact, passing all of the previous weeks' messages without failure.
  This way we could grow the system in a controlled manner and keep the
  different teams in sync.

  It worked wonderfully, and we would do it again.

I had the opportunity to apply this idea on a client-server system on my first large
project.

  We were moving frighteningly slowly. Our first three-month delivery was
  scheduled to deliver only a small set of functionality that might be considered
  interesting to the end users. We had to cut scope to meet even this mild
  ambition, and in the end delivered what I refer to as "read a number, write a
  number."

  Much to my surprise, the system went live on schedule, the sponsors threw a
  big party, and the users started putting numbers into the system.

  The system's design and code was not pretty, but we had connected the
  server-side software to the database system and could write functions on top
  of that architecture. Having the architectural elements connected and a
  sample piece of function running on it, we were able to develop more
  functionality in parallel with revising the architecture to be more robust (the
  Incremental Rearchitecture strategy).

  Our sponsors were happy with this early victory. We tested the team, the
  process, the technologies, and the architecture at a very early point in the
  project.

Other authors have other names for similar sorts of ideas. The Poppendiecks (2003)
write about a "spanning application"; Dave Thomas and Andy Hunt use what they
call "tracer bullets" (Hunt 1999).

What constitutes a walking skeleton varies with the system being designed. For a
client-server system, it would be a single screen-to-database-and-back capability.
For a multi-tier or multi-platform system, it is a working connection between the
tiers or platforms. For a compiler, it consists of compilation of the simplest element
of the language, possibly just a single token. For a business process, it is walking
through a single and simple business transaction (as Jeff Patton describes in the
technique Essential Interaction Design, later in this chapter).

Note that each subsystem is incomplete, but they are hooked together, and will stay
hooked together from this point on.

The walking skeleton is not complete or robust (it only walks, pardon the phrase),
and it is missing the flesh of the application functionality. Incrementally, over time,
the infrastructure will be completed and full functionality will be added.

A walking skeleton is different from a spike.[3] A spike is "the smallest
implementation that demonstrates plausible technical success." The spike typically
takes between a few hours and a few days to complete, and is thrown away
afterward, since it was built with nonproduction coding habits. A spike serves to
answer the question: Are we headed in the wrong direction?

  [3] http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?SpikeSolution.



A walking skeleton, on the other hand, is permanent code, built with production
coding habits, regression tests, and is intended to grow with the system. Once the
system is up and running, it will stay up and running for the rest of the project,
despite the incremental rearchitecture that is quite likely to occur.


Strategy 4. Incremental Rearchitecture

The system architecture will need to evolve from the walking skeleton and handle
changes in technology and business requirements over time. It is rarely effective to
shut down development to perform an architectural revision, so the team evolves
the architecture in stages, keeping the system running as they do so.

The team applies the idea of incremental development to revising the infrastructure
or architecture as well as the system's end functionality.


The question naturally arises: How completely designed should the system
architecture and infrastructure be during the early stages of the project?

Any one person has his personal "thought horizon," how much complexity he can
keep in his head for several days in a row, how much he can foresee from his
experience and knowledge of the situation. An architect who has done similar
systems in the same domain using similar technologies can think through to a
farther horizon than one just getting started.

Some people keep the thought horizon down to a few days. They get started
immediately with an initial design, and learn from that early version in which
direction they should push the design. Others like to think longer and consider more
contingencies before committing to an initial architecture.

The thought horizon on a Crystal Clear project is almost certainly reached within a
week or two. At that point, the designers are probably speculating beyond their
thought horizon, and would be better setting up the walking skeleton. They should
use that to get to the first of their frequent deliveries, and use the feedback to
improve the architecture. "Don't overdrive your headlights" is how some people
phrase it.

Here is a story about the use of incremental rearchitecture from my first large
project.

  The infrastructure team found after the second delivery that the object-to-
  relational database mapping they had planned to use would require an ever-
  increasing amount of programming as new functionality was added; in other
  words, it wouldn't scale. Being under heavy time pressure on a fixed-price
  contract, pressure was on them to simply keep plowing forward and just work
  harder and faster to keep up with the increasing work load.

  The team lead decided, however, that an architectural redesign was needed.
  His team continued to support the old design for one more increment, while
  the system's delivered functionality was still small, and at the same time
  started their redesign. They slipped the new architecture into the third delivery
  cycle, coaching the function-development teams on how to write to the new
  interfaces, and supporting them with some number of automatic code-
  generation mechanisms. In the fourth delivery cycle, they ripped out all of the
  uses of the initial architecture.

  On the fourth delivery cycle, the infrastructure architect breathed a sigh of
  relief: they could finally keep up with the now rapidly growing system
  functionality.

The converse also applies. Here is the unhappy story of a team that did not apply
incremental rearchitecture when they should have.

  The architects promised their executives that their radically new architecture
  would allow direct translation from use cases to running Java code, making the
  product incredibly responsive to changing business needs. This approach was,
  of course, a risky proposition, since no one had accomplished this before.

  Recognizing this risk, I suggested to the project manager that their project use
  the exact strategy we had used in the story just above: create a simple,
  straightforward architecture that could be delivered on time, and swap in the
  new architecture if and when it proved itself.

  The project manager said she had great confidence in the lead architects and
  didn't want the extra rework, so she chose to hang all hopes on the new
  architecture. Unhappily, the problem of going from use cases to running code
  turned out to be insoluble to those people. In the end, the project was left
  with no running architecture at all, and no product was ever shipped.

Developers in the last decade have shown that tidy, simple architectures are
reasonably straightforward to upgrade to their next stage of complexity and
performance. The business consequence of this is that, very often, a company can
create an early version to demonstrate function and possibly even generate
revenue, and then use the incremental rearchitecture strategy to revamp the
infrastructure under the running system.

Starting from a simple working architecture and applying incremental rearchitecture
is a winning strategy for most, though not all, systems.[4] It provides a number of
advantages when it can be used:

  [4] It would, for example, probably be a bad idea to ask all cell phone users to take their phones back to the supplier so that a new software architecture
  could be downloaded!



       The architecture is easier to modify when modifications are needed.

       The function and infrastructure teams get to work in parallel, advancing the
       moment at which usable function becomes available, or at least visible.

       The end users can view the system's proposed functionality early, and correct
       its fundamental fitness for business use.

       The running system might reveal shortcomings in the architecture that the
       early thought experiments didn't catch.

       The system can sometimes be deployed to a limited market, in which case the
       business will start earning revenue to help pay for ongoing development.

In deciding when to apply the strategy, ask

       whether the system can, in fact, be developed in two streams, with the
       infrastructure or architecture evolving in parallel with the system functionality
       (the answer is usually yes)

       whether, by first creating a fallback, simple architecture and testing the
       system in live use, the business might catch an unpredicted architectural
       mistake (the answer is often yes);

       whether the business can earn early revenue on deployment of a version with
       limited functionality to a limited market (the answer is surprisingly often yes)

Incremental rearchitecture is further discussed at length in the article "Extending an
Architecture as It Earns Business Value" (Cockburn 2004a).


Strategy 5. Information Radiators

An information radiator is a display posted in a place where people can see it as
they work or walk by. It shows readers information they care about, without their
having to ask anyone a question. This means more communication with fewer
interruptions.
A good information radiator

     Is large and easily visible to the casual, interested observer

     Is understood at a glance

     Changes periodically, so that it is worth visiting

     Is easily kept up to date

Typically, it is on paper, posted in the team room or in the hallway. In a few
exceptional circumstances, it is on a Web page that people refer to frequently.
Unusual examples of information radiators include a (real!) traffic light, a colored
orb, and a computer monitor hung outside a cubicle's partition in the hallway.

Todd Little of Landmark Graphics made the interesting observation that information
radiators generally serve to inform people outside the project team. The people on
the project team generally know the information posted, because of their close
communications with each other. It is the people outside the team who want or need
to know that information in order to make their own decisions, and otherwise would
interrupt the team to get that information, or would simply guess at it (often
incorrectly).


Information radiators can be used on any project, large or small. A small team can
use them very conveniently to maintain information that they otherwise would have
to maintain on the computer (which is both slower and less visible).

Information radiators are typically used to show status information, such as:

     the current iteration's work set (use cases or stories)

     the current work assignments

     the number of tests written (or passed)

     the number of use cases (or stories) delivered

     the status of key servers (up, down, in maintenance)

     the core of the domain model

     the results of the last reflection workshop

Online files and Web pages generally do not make good information radiators,
because an information radiator needs to be visible without significant effort on the
part of the viewer. I have, of course, run into exceptions to this rule. One was the
team performing continuous integration with CruiseControl, a dedicated server
running a build-and-test script and posting the test results to a Web page. The
programmers tended to leave that Web page visible at all times on their screens, so
they could respond to failing integration tests immediately. The other exception was
the monitor hung over a cubicle wall into the hallway (see Figure 3-5), displaying
current run time measurements of the system in use.


Figure 3-5. A monitor hung over the cubicle wall to show real-time
  measurements of the system in operation. (Courtesy of Randy
                      Stafford, IQNavigator)




Freeman-Benson and Borning wrote an experience report on a methodology they
call YP (Borning 2003). They report on the effect of using a real traffic light:

  Actually there are several: one in the hallway of our laboratory, two more in
  developer offices, and one virtual traffic light on the web. We use four color
  combinations:

        green when the build and all the tests have succeeded,

        yellow when the build and tests are in progress,

        yellow and green together when the build has passed the point where it
        is likely to fail (in practice, this means that all the tests have passed and
        that the final installer and distribution are being produced), and

        red if any part of the build or tests has failed.

  The traffic light is a powerful symbol of the current state of the software. The
  web version at www.urbansim.org/fireman makes the status visible to anyone
  else who might be interested (including you, Gentle Reader, if you wish), and
  in particular for our customers, although in a less compelling way than the
  physical device.

  The first author has used the traffic light as part of applying YP in four other
  development projects as well. Interestingly, only one team in addition to ours
  is still using the lightthe other teams disconnected their lights because they
  didn't like them being red all the time. Rather than fixing the underlying
  problem (that their system was sufficiently unstable that their regression tests
  would not pass reliably), they chose to "eliminate the messenger." Only one of
  the teams acknowledged this decision explicitly.

  In conversations with other team leads and software managers, we learned
  that a number of them had tried "failure indicators" such as sirens, flashing
  lights, red lights, and so forth, and that each had cancelled the experiment
  after a few days. Apparently the use of negative reinforcement (a red light)
  without the corresponding positive reinforcement (a green light) was too
  damaging to morale. Our experience with the traffic light is quite the opposite:
  everyone who joins a YP team immediately reports a sense of comfort at the
  large (812") green light glowing its message of "all is well with the build." Or
  on the rare occasions when the software has failed the nightly build tests, as
  the staff arrives in the morning, in the winter's gloom, with the lab hallway
  illuminated by the red glow of the traffic light, it's clear that a) something has
  gone wrong, and b) it should get fixed as soon as possible.

Figures 3-1 to 3-5 are photographs of different information radiators.


  Figure 3-1. Development status of the user stories. (Courtesy of
                        ThoughtWorks)




  Figure 3-2. Charts of the code base kept near the programmers.
     Notice the code size going down in the last two deliveries!
           (Courtesy of Randy Stafford, IQNavigator)




Figure 3-3. The results of a reflection workshop. (Courtesy of Jeff
                        Patton and Tomax)
Figure 3-4. Keeping track of the CVS branches. I like the creative
  use of hangers, pads and cubicle partitions. (Courtesy of John
                      Bullock, IQNavigator)
THE TECHNIQUES
The techniques I have selected are

  1. Methodology Shaping, gathering information about prior experiences and using
     it to come up with the starter conventions

  2. Reflection Workshop, a particular workshop format for Reflective Improvement

  3. Blitz Planning, which I also sometimes refer to as a project planning "jam
     session" (as in jazz) to emphasize its collaborative nature, a quick and
     collaborating project planning technique

  4. Delphi Estimation, a way to come up with a starter estimate for the total
     project

  5. Daily Stand-ups, a quick and efficient way to pass information around the
     team on a daily basis

  6. Agile Interaction Design, a fast version of usage-centered design

  7. Process Miniature, a learning technique

  8. Side-by-Side Programming, a less intense alternative to pair programming

  9. Burn Charts, an efficient way to planning and reporting progress, particularly
     suited for use on Information Radiators

As described in the e-mail series between Crystal and Alistair (see Chapter 1), no
single specific technique is mandated by Crystal. These particular strategies provide
a good starting point, particularly the methodology shaping and reflection
workshops, since those are most likely to be new to the group. Burn charts have
become an interesting topic in their own right, since they have a natural match to
the earned-value charts used in systems engineering project management.


Technique 1. Methodology Shaping

Establish the starter methodology in two steps:

1. Project interviews

2. Methodology shaping workshop


The information from the first feeds into the second.


Project Interviews
With this little technique, you will build a small library of experiences in your
organization that shows the strengths, weaknesses, and themes of your
organization. When you go into the methodology shaping workshop, you will
examine them and discuss how to take advantage of the strengths and how to
compensate for, or avoid, the weaknesses.

  We found in one organization a theme that projects that had good internal and
  external communication went well, but when they didn't have that
  communication, the teams had a bad time and the outcome was negative.

  Seeing this in front of us, I made extra effort to bring our project experiences
  to the directors of development and the requesting division. We wrote a one-
  page summary after every iteration, summarized our costs, accomplishments,
  frustrations, and lessons learned. We arranged for these two people to meet
  for an hour and review the project using the report as a base for their
  discussion. They actually talked about many other things during that hour, but
  they both commented on the positive effects of allocating time for discussion
  and beginning by going through the report.

  At the end of that year, the director of development commented, somewhat
  quizzically, that we had had a fairly similar project assignment as two other
  groups, but those other two projects failed, while ours succeeded. Looking at
  the projects, we noticed that ours was the only project that took time to
  attend to communication paths both within and external to the project. The
  theme we had found in our project interviews had played out once more, true
  to form.


Technique Variant 1

Start with yourselves, but also include other people from a few other projects in
your organization. Have several people on your team interview people on other
projects. Start your collection with four to ten interview reports. It is useful (but not
critical) that each of your people interview more than one person on one project.
You might talk to any two of the following: the project manager, the team lead, a
user interface designer, and a programmer. Their different perspectives on the same
project will prove informative. Even more informative, however, will be the common
responses across multiple projects.

Keep in mind is that whatever the interviewee says is relevant. During an interview,
don't offer your own opinions about any matter but use your judgment to select the
next question to ask.

The following steps summarize how I have worked over the years in doing my own
project interviews (Cockburn 2003a).


Step 1
I ask to see one sample of each work product produced. Looking at these, I detect
how much ceremony was likely to be on the project and think about what questions
I should ask about the work products. I look for duplicated work, places where they
might have been difficult to keep up to date. I ask whether iterative development
was in use, and, if so, how the documents were updated in following iterations. I
look, in particular, for ways in which informal communication was used to patch over
inconsistencies in the paperwork.

  On one project, the team lead showed me twenty-three work products. I
  noticed a fair degree of overlap among them, and so I asked if the later ones
  were generated by tools from the earlier ones. The team lead said no, the
  people had to reenter them from scratch. So I followed up by asking how the
  people felt about this. He said they really hated it, but he made them do it
  anyway.

You can guess that that last piece of information is very useful in the methodology
shaping workshop.


Step 2

I ask for a short history of the project. This history includes date started, staff
changes (growing and shrinking), team structure, and the emotionally high and low
points of the project life. I do this to calibrate the size and type of the project and to
detect where there may be other interesting questions to ask.


Step 3

I ask, "What were the key things you did wrong that you wouldn't want to repeat on
your next project?" I write down whatever they say, and I fish around for related
issues to investigate.


Step 4

I ask, "What were the key things you did right that you would certainly like to
preserve in your next project?" In response to this question, people have named
everything from where they sit, to having food in the refrigerator, to social activities,
communication channels, software tools, software architecture, and domain
modeling. Whatever you hear, write it down.


Step 5

I revisit the issues, "What are your priorities with respect to the things you liked on
the project? What is most critical to keep, and what is most negotiable?" This is
redundant, technically speaking, but my experience is that people come up with
slightly different answers. I write those down. It is useful to ask at this point, "Was
there anything that surprised you about the project?"


Step 6

Finally, I ask whether there is anything else I should hear about. I see where the
question goes.

You may find it useful to construct an interview template on which to write the
results, so you can exchange them easily. The time that we did this, our template
was two pages long (to control the amount of writing the interviewer does) and
contained the following sections.

  1. Project name, job of person interviewed

  2. Project data (start/end dates, staff size, domain, technology).

  3. Project history

  4. Did wrong/would not repeat

  5. Did right/would preserve

  6. Priorities

  7. Other


Technique Variant 2

Jens Coldewey, in Germany, used a different technique to get the information he
sought for his methodology shaping workshop. He sent to each member of his
upcoming group a short questionnaire, asking what they had liked about their
previous projects and wanted to retain on the new project, and what they had not
liked about their previous projects and would want to set up differently on the new
project. He took those answers straight into the methodology shaping workshop.


Technique Variant 3

Following Jens's lead, I have also run a facilitated workshop to come up with the
same information. You can do this workshop in groups of any size, from a Crystal
Clear project of just four people, to an organization of several dozen people. Allow
an hour for this workshop if you have a small group, and two to three hours for a
large group.

Break into work groups of three to five people each. Set up several flip charts with
pens of differing colors at each work group.
Have each work group brainstorm and list all the things they have personally
experienced on projects in the past and would like not to repeat on the current or
next project. They write all those on one flip chart (or, more likely, several pages of
that flip chart). Time box the activity so they don't go all afternoon!

On the other flip chart and with a different color pen, have them brainstorm and list
all the things they have personally experienced on their own projects in the past
(this is important, because otherwise they are likely to write down ideas they have
heard about but not experienced), and would like to see repeated.

Spend some time combining and merging the common ideas in each list to make a
single list of disliked/don't repeat and a separate list of liked/repeat items.

Giving each person a number, say seven, votes for each list, ask them to mark on
each list the items they feel most important. They can stack all seven votes on one
item or spread them around however they wish.

Count the votes for each item and sort by voting results.

At this point, you have a table of contents for project situations to "avoid" and ones
to "keep," prioritized by personal significance to the people in the room.

During this workshop, you will not solve any of the problems mentioned. That is the
work to do during the methodology shaping workshop. What you have is the
information needed in that next workshop, which might take place on the same or a
different day.


Methodology Shaping Workshop

The methodology shaping workshop is nothing more or less than a larger version of
the periodic reflection workshop described next. In the periodic reflection workshop,
the team already has a list of rules and conventions they are using, and reflect on
which to keep or drop. That workshop should make relatively small changes to the
set of conventions.

The methodology shaping workshop, on the other hand, starts with a group of
people who have not done the exercise before and don't yet know what their
operating conventions will be. Their output will therefore be a single large list of
proposed ideas, rules, and conventions. The book Agile Software Development
contains a sample thirty-six-point list that was the result of one such investigation.

The workshop starts with a review of the organization's fixed rules about software
development. These are taken as given rules, unless someone on the team has an
idea on how to shift any of them.

The people go through the list of "liked/keep" items that came from the project
interviews and see how many of those they can easily arrange on the upcoming
project. They table the difficult ones for separate study.

They go through the list of "disliked/avoid" items and brainstorm ways to avoid
them on the upcoming project. The answers get written down on the list of ideas,
rules, and conventions.

They locate the themes of the organization (as shown in the story at the start of this
technique), and discuss how to handle, compensate for, or take advantage of those
themes. They write their answers on the list of ideas, rules, and conventions.

They go through the difficult items saved up to now, discuss and brainstorm any
ways to deal with them, given all the ideas they already have written down. They
write down the ideas they want to try on the main list, and write down on a
separate list the items they are worried about but don't have ideas for. (They look at
this list later in the project, either to see if they have new ideas, or to discuss with
the project sponsor and their managers, in case they run into exactly those
problems.)

At this point, the list of ideas, rules, and conventions is probably quite long.

The people go through the list again, and mark the ones that are most important to
pay attention to, and put into parentheses the ones that are interesting but possibly
marginal. These latter ones are the ones that are nice to have but the first to go in
case the team gets overloaded with following the list.

The team will update these conventions a month later during their first reflection
workshop (I write the time "a month later" as a reminder that it should not go too
long before review. The exact time chosen is up to the team to decide.)

Believe it or not, these are now the "starter methodology" details for the project!


Technique 2. Reflection Workshop

The team should pause for an hour periodicallycertainly after each deliveryto reflect
on its working conventions. In the reflection workshop, the team members discuss
what is working well, what needs improvement, and what they are going to do
differently during the next period.

I like to do one of these halfway through the first iteration as a sanity check:
"Working this way, are we on track to complete our assignment in this iteration, or
do we need to compensate now, before it is too late?" Since my experience is that
most teams schedule too much work to do in the first iteration, I pay less attention
to bad estimates of how much can be done in the first iteration, and look for
disastrously bad working conventions. Repairing bad working conventions is what I
focus on in the first workshop.

People who hold reflection workshops on a regular basis tell me of a pattern that
shows up: The group finds a lot to discuss in the first few workshops, and then,
after a while, they find that there is little more to say from the previous time. In
some cases, they lengthen the time between workshops, holding them only after
each delivery. In other cases they use the time for a closer examination of their
team values, personal working styles, and the like.
There are various formats for a workshop handling these themes. The one that
follows is my favorite because it is both simple and brief (as are all of my favorite
techniques). Norm Kerth (2001) wrote a book called Project Retrospectives that
discusses many other exercises you could perform during a reflection workshop.


The Keep/Try Reflection Workshop

Very simply, capture the following three things on a flip chart and then post the flip
chart prominently as an information radiator for the group to see as they work.

  1. What we should keep. These are the conventions we don't want to lose in the
     next time period. The sorts of things that get mentioned often include sitting
     close together, noninterruptable focus hours, daily stand-up meetings, and
     automated regression tests.

  2. Where we are having ongoing problems. It is not generally healthy to focus
     too much on problems, but people get stuck in the workshop if they can't
     mention a problem that is bothering them and subsequently see it get written
     on to the poster. Create a half-column or less on the flip chart to capture the
     problems that we are having trouble getting around. Topics that often get
     mentioned are too many interruptions, requirements changing too often,
     people changing code without notifying anyone else, unable to buy new tool
     suites.


           Figure 3-6. Poster format for the reflection workshop.




  3. What we want to try in the next time period. In a sense, these are the most
     important of the three categories. These are what the team agrees to try for
     the next few weeks. Some of the suggestions I hear include: two hours of
     uninterrupted, for example, work from 10:00 A.M. to noon each day; use of
     coding standards; more unit or acceptance tests; occasional pair
     programming; daily stand-up meeting.

You might run your first reflection workshop in no more than fifteen minutes. This
will constrain the time of the discussion so that people do not run too far afield, and
focus the team on coming up with concrete suggestions for what to keep and what
to change. This provides the team with a process miniature for the technique.

After the first one, you can decide how long to allocate for each workshop. One
group chose to allocate two days in an off-site location every three months for the
first year of their project. They used the first day for team building and reflection
workshop, and spent the second day planning the next three-month delivery cycle.
They eventually cut it down to just one day in their offices. I have used an hour in
the cafeteria every couple of months, down to fifteen to thirty minutes every two
weeks.

Figures 3-7 and 3-8 are photographs of reflection workshop results using the above
technique. You will notice in the second one that we created an additional section
just above the Problems to capture ideas that people had but didn't want to try right
away. This section served to feed the discussion at the following workshop.


Figure 3-7. Reflection workshop flip charts showing project history
       and ideas tried. (Courtesy of Jeff Patton and Tomax)




  Figure 3-8. Reflection workshop output. (Courtesy of Jeff Patton
                            and Tomax)
Technique 3. Blitz Planning

The planning session is an opportunity for the executive sponsor, expert user, and
developers to contribute together to build the project map and timeline. As always,
there are several ways to work.

One technique is the "planning game" from XP. In the planning game, people place
index cards on the table, one user story per card. The group pretends there are no
dependencies between cards, and simply lines them up in the preferred sequence of
development. The developers write on each card an estimate of how long it will take
to produce the function; the sponsor or expert user puts them into development
priority sequence, taking into account the development time and business value of
each function. The cards are clustered into iterations, and those iterations are
clustered into releases, usually not longer than a few months each. The planning
game is described in detail in (Beck 2000).

The following describes the variation I like to use. I call it Blitz Planning to
emphasize that it goes fast. However, I also like to refer to it on occasion as a
Project Planning "Jam Session" to emphasize that everyone is supposed to play
together and off each other in a collaborative way, as in a jazz jam session. If you
lose the amicable collaboration, you can do the technique, but you lose many
opportunities to creatively improve the project plan.

I find this technique works well for a planning horizon up to about three months.
After that, the amount of detail is overwhelming. For time horizons longer than
three months, I use the project map described among the work products.[5]

  [5] This is an example of "two-tiered" project planning. The long-term plan is the coarse-grained project map, the short-term plan is the result of the blitz
  planning session. Two-tiered project plans are common in agile projects.



Here is a brief overview of the technique. I describe the steps in more detail below.

Gather into one room representatives of each stakeholder category, the executive
sponsor, end users, and developers, in particular. Brainstorm onto index cards all the
development tasks to be done. Collate and merge the tasks to avoid duplication.
Sequence the cards according to priority and dependency order. At this point the
developers put down the work time estimates. If a particular person is required for
the task, add that person's name. If there is a dependency on an external group,
write that somewhere else on the card.

Having the cards on the table, work through the plan looking for key milestones and
optimizations. Identify the walking skeleton, the first delivery, and the first delivery
that produces a revenue stream. Look for excessive dependencies on any one
person, and off-load that person. Look for early tasks that unnecessarily block early
revenue stream, and tasks listed for later that for risk reduction reasons should be
done early (e.g., load testing). Move those cards around to better places. Work with
the sponsor to make sure the plan is delivering functionality in accordance with the
project's true priorities.

The result is your project plan.

Figure 3-9 shows a sample of such a card, and Figure 3-10 shows a sample of how
the cards look when laid out on the table.


                                 Figure 3-9. Sample blitz planning card.
          Figure 3-10. Cards as they might be laid out on the table.




Here are the steps in detail. Note that this technique is spelled out for Level 1
practitioners.[6] When you reach Level 2 with this technique, try some variations to
handle situations where the requirements are not yet known, where the time
horizon is longer than three months, using sticky notes instead of cards, and so on.

  [6] See "shu-ha-ri" (Fig. 1-2, p. 9).
1. Gather the attendees.

  I subtitle this technique a project planning "jam session" because the
  technique allows the different project stakeholders to gather together and
  share ideas on how to make the optimal plan. Traditionally, the plan is made
  by the project manager or team lead without buy-in from the other
  stakeholders. That leads to two dysfunctions: First, the plan is of course
  wrong, since the poor person assigned to construct it can't possibly know all
  the tasks and times; second, when the errors in the project plan become
  evident, people find it easy to point accusing fingers at the person who made
  the plan. To counter these dysfunctions, make sure the executive sponsor, one
  or two key users, any business analysts, and the entire development team,
  including anyone involved in testing and deployment, are in the room. This
  group will name the talks more completely, the time estimates will be more
  reasonable, and, just as important, everyone will see all the trade-offs made in
  constructing the plan. Everyone is jointly responsible for the result, and they
  all know it. As one person said, "We all made it, we all discussed the
  optimizations made."

2. Brainstorm the tasks.

  Everyone grabs cards and writes tasks on them as fast as they can. Usually
  the developers do most of the writing, but the executive sponsor and expert
  user often have a few tasks to contribute. List every task that will take half a
  day to several weeks, including interviewing users, programming specific
  functions, writing user help text, migrating databases, and installing the
  system (I often group tiny tasks together). The idea is to be complete. This
  step may last 5, 10, or 15 minutes.

3. Lay out the tasks.

  Everyone lays the cards out on the table in dependency order, the first ones at
  the head of the table, with successive tasks down the table. Tasks that can run
  in parallel are placed side by side across the table; tasks that run sequentially
  are placed above and below each other; duplicate task cards are removed. It
  usually requires a big table. I have used a large conference table and also
  several six-foot cafeteria tables placed end to end.

4. Review the tasks.

  Everyone walks up and down the table, looking for tasks that didn't get
  captured in the brainstorming. One person's card often triggers a thought from
  another person. Add cards as needed.

5. Estimate and tag the tasks.

  Whoever is going to do each task writes down their estimate for how long it
  will take (I write this on the lower left corner). If multiple people come up with
  different estimates, they have a brief discussion and put down their best
  second estimate. They also write down the names of any specific people
  required for any particular task (I write this on the top of the card). It often
  happens that the team lead's name is on a disproportionate number of cards.
  Seeing that person's name on so many cards should lead the team into a
  discussion of how to off-load that person or otherwise reduce the dependency.
  If a task is dependent on an external event or task, mark that on the card (I
  write this on the center of the right side of the card.)

6. Sort the tasks.

  In this step, the people work to identify more closely the presence or absence
  of dependencies, and to question the placement of cards on the table.

  Tasks that are placed sequentially often can be started in parallel. Identifying
  possible parallelism loosens the constraints on the plan. Also, it often turns out
  that there are parallel streams of activity, one for the expert user, one for the
  developers, or perhaps three separate streams for infrastructure, functionality,
  and user interface development. These parallel streams start to look like
  separate tracks of cards running down the table, occasionally coming together.
  Certain cards have a strictly sequential relationship, such that the second
  simply cannot be started before the first has finished (e.g., "Evaluate vendors"
  must fully precede "Set up contract with vendor"). Mark these pairs in some
  special way so that information doesn't get lost when the cards get moved
  around (I put the same capital letter, A, B, C, at an adjoining edge of the card,
  the bottom edge of the first card, and the corresponding point on the top edge
  of the second card). These strict dependencies are surprisingly rare; I rarely
  get beyond the letter E.

7. Mark the walking skeleton, the earliest release, and the earliest revenue.

  Finding the first and smallest collection of functionality that can conceivably be
  of use to some users is critical. It is critical because that release represents
  the first time the users will see the system, their first idea of the look, feel,
  and shape of the system. Setting that point as early as possible gives the
  entire organization the most time to adapt to any new ideas or mismatches
  that show up from the initial release. On some occasions, this first release
  represents the earliest moment at which revenue can be gained; in this
  situation, the group should focus on getting all other cards out of its way.[7] All
  in all, three events of interest are located: the walking skeleton, the earliest
  usable release, and the point of earliest revenue. I mark these points by
  putting a bit of distance between the cards above and below those points. I
  have also used string, yardsticks, pencilsanything to demark those points. It
  requires cooperation between the expert user, executive sponsor, and lead
  designer to discover and optimally set these points, because some tasks will
  have to be moved up and others deferred. Whoever is moving the tasks
  around needs to be aware of the consequences of these moves, and that
  means each stakeholder group has to be present, alert, and cooperative.
    [7] Software by Numbers (Denne 2003) is an excellent tutorial on this subject, using language of financial analysts. They plan in
    terms of "minimal marketable features."


  A word is in order about the tasks that precede the initial release: Some of the
  early tasks are likely to be strictly technical, such as ordering software, setting
  up a contract, or loading a database. It is useful to have those tasks visible to
  the executive sponsor and expert user, because they need to explain the state
  of the project to other people. The technical task cards show what work needs
  to be done before business software will become visible.

  Historically in our business, the user group gets told only, "The programming
  team says they have a bunch of technical work to do first." This often
  translates to months going by without deliveries or even visible progress. By
  making the tasks visible and public, the executive sponsor or expert user can
  report, "They have five technical things to do before we can see some
  software," "They still have two technical things to do before we can see some
  software," "They're on the last technical thing, and then they'll show us some
  running software."

  This sort of visibility goes a long way to reducing the tensions between the
  groups.

8. Identify other releases.

  The group works out where other natural release points happen. Quite often,
  there is a particular cluster of function that really should be bundled together
  for the users to make good use of the system. At some point, the functions to
  be included simply become a long list, and at that point it may be more
  valuable to base the releases on regular time periods (monthly, bimonthly, or
  quarterly), rather than on collections of functionality. Neither Crystal Clear nor
  the Blitz Planning technique mandate what algorithm you use for choosing
  iteration lengths and release periods. Mark the key releases using a space
  between the cards, string, yardsticks, or whatever.

9. Optimize the plan to fit the project priorities.

  At this point, you have a plan. Typically the plan is not yet a good plan. It is
  my experience that when the numbers on the cards are added up, the team is
  in for "sticker shock" (this is the shock a car buyer experiences when stepping
  around to read the sticker posted on the car window announcing the price
  after all the car's options are added together). The entire group, and
  particularly the executive sponsor, expert user, and lead designer now have
  some creative problem solving to do to come up with an acceptable plan. What
  they shift depends on the priorities set for the project: time-to-market, cost,
  or feature set. This is where they really start "jamming." Typically, following
  the sticker shock, one of three things happen:

        The executive sponsor reconsiders the business need for the project (in
        one case, the executive team decided simply to buy a commercial
        package instead).

        The team removes tasks from the project.

        They shrug their shoulders and simply move forward.

  Pressuring the developers to change their estimates is not advisable. That not
  only makes a lie of the plan, but it convinces the developers that the executive
  sponsor is not being realistic, open, and honest.
 In the worst possible case, the executive sponsor has the right to say,
 "Okay, I see the tasks and the time estimates. However, I can't change the
 deadline, and I can't see anything else to remove, reorder or outsource.
 I'm going to multiply all estimates by 80 percent so that we can meet our
 target date. In the meantime, let's all keep our eyes open for new
 alternatives so we can reestablish these original estimates" (see the
 discussion on Crystal Clear and "Reallocation of Power," page 323)

 This is a drastic measure and should not be used lightly. The point of doing
 it is to make public both how the priorities affect the schedule, and the
 fact that the team's estimates are being overridden. Everyone has seen
 the cards and the original estimates. The team should track both plans,
 report against both in their status charts, and keep visibility of progress
 high.

 Take it seriously if you have to resort to this measure even twice. That
 indicates there is another problem in the organization needing to be sorted
 out, having to do with the viability of the organization's business model,
 the trust between developers and sponsors, or the historic accuracy of the
 development team's estimates. Straightening those out will be crucial to
 the ongoing viability of the development team.

When optimizing the card layout on the table, the people look for three
improvements in particular.

     They spot that a particular cluster of cards almost creates a coherent
     release having business value. By moving a card up higher, they can get
     that coherent business value much earlier. In one case, I heard the
     expert user say, "If we only had this card up here, we could start
     charging revenue with this release." You can guess that we immediately
     moved that card up, and then moved down all cards not strictly needed
     to produce that release!

     They spot a risk from having a card late in the project. This is typically
     done by someone with technical background playing the challenger.

       I saw a card near the very end of the table labeled "Load Testing."
       Not thinking too much about it, I asked the lead designer, "How long
       will it take to perform?" He answered, "A few days." Still not
       worrying, I asked, "And suppose it fails, how long is it likely to take
       to revise the architecture?" He answered, "Oh, three or four weeks."
       At this point the expert user started looking alarmed. I asked,
       "Would it be possible to do it earlier?" "Sure," he answered.

       We looked for the earliest moment at which he could do it without
       damaging the other critical business items on the table. I tentatively
       placed it just after the initial release. "Could you do it already here?
       (and then you'd have lots of time to revise the architecture if it
       fails)." I noticed the expert user vehemently nodding her head on the
       other side of the table and her large sigh of relief when he said,
       "Sure."
           They spot that one particular person has too many cards allocated to him
           or her. That person is going to be overloaded and will probably get into
           trouble. They brainstorm how to assign those tasks, or the bulk of some
           of them, to other people to reduce the risk to the project and the strain
           on that person.

 10. Capture the output.

     You have a plan, but it is only cards on a table. You need to preserve the
     information.

     You can photograph the table, tape the cards together and mount them on the
     wall as an information radiator, or type them into another tool of your choice. I
     like to number the cards so that their placement on the table can be
     reconstructed. I number them 1, 2, 3, and so on down the table for the
     sequential relationships, 3a, 3b, 3c, and so on across any particular parallel
     set (and on occasion 3a1, 3a2, 3a3, and so on if there are nested
     subsequences).


There is one note I am obliged to put in here and that bears repeating several times
in the book. A common interpretation of both XP's planning game and blitz planning
is that the executive sponsor is at the mercy of the developers in constructing the
project plan. In actuality, there is a three-way division of responsibilities: the
executive sponsor's, the developers', and their joint responsibility.

The executive sponsor is responsible for choosing the priorities that drive which
system features stay on the table, which are removed if scope is to be cut, and
which functions should go into which release.

The developers are responsible for assessing the time needed to do their work. The
executive sponsor needs to recognize that these are the people who have been
hired to do the work; they are professionals and these are their best estimates.

They are jointly responsible for being creative in creating strategies to maximize
their effectiveness. I usually find the initial layout of the cards on the table
depressing and unsatisfactory for business reasons. The developers can't change the
priorities and the executive sponsor can't change the estimates. What are they to
do? They work together. The initial layout is usually inefficient. Working together,
they come up with creative reorderings to get a better result. If the resulting plan is
still unacceptable, the executive sponsor must decide what the top priority items
are, what gets dropped, or perhaps whether the deadline or team be changed.

When they work together, they jointly see the constraints, jointly generate options,
and jointly construct a plan that produces the best result for the resources
expended. It is for this reason that I sometimes refer to this technique as a project
planning jam session. (Done with good will, this technique also is a lot of funanother
characteristic of a good jam session.)


Technique 4. Delphi Estimation Using Expertise Rankings
People always get around to asking, "But how should we estimate the length of time
it will take to develop the software?" The true answer is, "Best guess." While
technically correct, and practiced on every project, this answer is rarely comforting.

A group of us created an estimation technique one night, while trying to work out
the bid on a $15 million fixed-price, fixed-scope project. I have since found the line
of reasoning we took to have an interesting separation of questions. I am told that
this corresponds to what is known as the "Delphi" technique (forecasting the future,
but presumably without incense, vestal virgins, or answering in riddles).

This technique was first described in Surviving Object-Oriented Projects (Cockburn
1998). I present it here, in story form. The story relates to a larger Crystal Orange
project, but you can still use it in adjusted form on a smaller project.

  Before beginning the project proper, but after spending two weeks gathering
  140 rough use cases, we made our first project estimate. Our four best OO
  designers, the project manager, and a few other experienced, non-OO people
  made up the planning team. We split the session into four phases:

        estimating the size of the system to be built

        estimating work time according to the type of person we would need

        suggesting releases, by technical and business dependency

        balancing the releases into approximately similar sizes

  We held an open auction to arrive at a size estimate. We constructed a large
  table on the whiteboard. Each senior designer created row-labels for the
  factors he thought would determine the project effort. One wrote, "Technical
  frameworks, use cases, UI screens." Another added, "Business classes" and
  yet another added, "Database generation tool."

  Each person wrote in their column of the table his guess of how many of each
  factor was present. After everyone had had a turn, we ran a second round.
  The first person added a new column with his revised estimate based on what
  he had learned during the first round.

  We did three rounds this way. At the end, there were about twenty to twenty-
  five factors in all. Some people used multiplication factors from the estimate of
  business classes, some from use cases, some from UI screens. It turned out
  that the key drivers for the estimates were the number of:

        business classes

        screens

        frameworks
        technical classes (infrastructure, utility, etc.)

  We discussed whether we had achieved convergence and what the differing
  factors were. In the end, we agreed on some numbers and understood where
  we differed.

  In the second phase, we decided what type of person we would need for each
  section of code. Frameworks are hard, and there are only a select number of
  people who can write them reasonably, so we made that sensitive to the
  specific person we could hire. We decided that the business classes would be
  relatively easy to write, but would require business knowledge. Technical
  classes would be harder, but not require business knowledge. In the end we
  settled on:

        expert developers for the frameworks

        intermediate level developers for technical and UI classes

        relatively novice developers who knew the domain for those classes

  We split the table of classes to be developed into those three categories,
  summed the classes per category, and decided on how many classes per
  month that level of developer could develop. We gave the framework
  developers 10 weeks per framework, the technical and UI developers 3 weeks
  per class, and the business class developers 2 weeks per class.

  The sum of all those weeks gave us our first project time estimate. We
  hemmed and hawed over that for a long time, comparing it against other
  reasonability measures, such as the rate we could hire and train people. In the
  end, we kept the estimate.

  Deciding the releases was straightforward. We already knew we wanted a
  release every three months. Nothing could be delivered until most of the
  infrastructure was done, so that went into release 1. (Note that it was later
  completely replaced, using the incremental rearchitecture strategy.) We
  created a Project Map, a dependency graph of the business functions, by
  technical and business dependence. From the size estimates, we circled areas
  of similar size. That gave us our release plan.

I tracked the project against our original estimate periodically during the project.
Our progress tracked our original plan over the long run, but going slower at first
and then faster at the end.

I present this technique here because I notice that most people who use a Delphi
technique forget the crucial second phase, when the group assesses their ability to
hire specific people with specific talents and skills. Without this information the
result is not a plan, but a wish.
Technique 5. Daily Stand-up Meetings

The daily stand-up meeting is a short meeting to trade notes on status, progress,
and problems. The key word is short. The meeting is not used to discuss problems,
but to identify problems. If you find you are discussing how to solve problems in
your daily stand-up, raise your hand and ask that problem resolution be dealt with
right after the stand-up meeting with only those people who have to be there.

The term "daily stand-up" comes from the Scrum methodology (Schwaber 2002).
The idea is to get rid of long so-called status meetings where programmers ramble
on for five or ten minutes about a piece of code they are working on or where
management people ramble about various project initiatives. To keep people from
rambling, the convention is that the meeting takes place standing up, so people
can't fall asleep, type on their laptops, or doodle on paper. We want them sensitive
to the passage of time.

The authors of Scrum suggest that each person simply answers three questions:

       What did I work on yesterday?

       What do I plan on working on today?

       What is getting in my way?

The daily stand-up meeting is amazingly effective for disseminating information;
highlighting when someone is stuck; revealing when the item someone is working
on is too low a priority, off-topic, or adding unrequested features; and generally
keeping the group focused and on track. It is simple, and it has been added into
projects using every imaginable methodology with good effect.


Technique 6. Essential Interaction Design

Most authors on agile development don't say much about the external design of the
system,[8] giving the impression we think it is unimportant. Speaking at least for
myself, I don't write about it because I have so little personal experience with this
specialty, even though I recognize its importance.

  [8] Patton (2002) wrote an experience report about adding interaction design to agile development, and Cohn (2004) has a chapter on usage-centered
  design.



For that reason, I include here four adaptations of usage-centered design
(Constantine 1999) that Jeff Patton created for the agile context. Jeff highlights and
simplifies the activities needed to define, design, and test the system's
personalities[9] and its interaction contexts. These techniques are well suited to
projects where people are collocated and have to get a lot accomplished in a limited
time. (Just because you have easy access to expert users doesn't mean you get to
waste their time!)
   [9] My term. It seems to me the interaction design community is missing this higher-level concept of their work.



A software system presents personalities to its various end users through its help,
information, and speed. It might be designed to be fast and efficient, for example,
or warm, friendly, and informative. These are the personalities it presents to the
outside world. Most systems present different personalities to different users,
depending on those users' backgrounds and needs. Except most designers don't
develop the personalities in any deliberate fashion. They simply throw together
whatever they have on hand, and the personalities of the system are just whatever
happens to come out.

There are probably one or two focal user groups that the sponsors really want to see
satisfied with the new system. The team needs to find out who those are, what they
need to accomplish using the software, what personality is best suited for each, and
be sure they are properly served by the system. They need to detect, write down,
and periodically recheck who those are.

Jeff illustrates with the example of a chain of retail stores. The cashier uses the
system daily, gets familiar with it, and prioritizes for speed in registering sales. The
store consultant, on the other hand, won't use the system very often, won't be
fluent with its interface, but knowing all aspects of the store's operations, will want
to do more functions than the cashier. The cashier wants a fast-and-efficient
personality to work with; the store consultant wants an informative and helpful one.

When working through their tasks, the users will want to see information in clusters,
which the interaction design community refers to as interaction contexts. Part of
interaction design is detecting the clustering of information suited to each user's
tasks, and looking for commonality across those. The developers will convert those
to user interface settings, often with a set of information matching an interaction
context.

Essential interaction design produces

        Shared understanding among the sponsors, users and developers who were
        present in the room as to the roles and tasks to be addressed by the system
        and the relative priorities of each

        Paper-and-pen collages ("reminding markers" in cooperative-game language)
        showing roles, tasks, and interaction contexts, marked with notes so that the
        team can deliver them in business value order.

Jeff articulates four techniques, in all.

   1. Essential Interaction Design (the Workshop)

   2. Deriving the UI

   3. Usability Inspection (during Design)

   4. QA Testing the System Personalities
The first is essential interaction design itself, done either near the beginning of the
project or the start of an iteration. After that, he presents short techniques for
designing the screens themselves, for reviewing the UI with the users, and for
testing internally that the finished software is appropriate for the user roles that will
be using it.

Here are the techniques as Jeff describes them.


Essential Interaction Design (the Workshop)

The approach is based on the usage-centric design approach (Constantine 1999)
except that this initial requirements elicitation and design process can be completed
in a couple of hours to a couple of days. When an experienced facilitator is used, no
advanced training of the business people is required. The techniques can be applied
during initial requirements elicitation, when building incremental release plans, while
defining the general form of the software, deriving user interface from use cases,
acceptance testing, and even during end-user usability evaluation, if need be.

What follows is a step-by-step outline of the initial requirements elicitation and
design process. The overall goal of the technique suite is to hasten the discovery of
requirements by bringing together people from each critical aspect of the project
and allowing them to explain what they know to each other.


Step 1. Get the right people into the room.

We're replacing weeks of interviewing and field research with conversation during
this meeting, so it's critical the meeting involve members of each constituency the
system will be serving, including those developing the system. Remember, if you're
the facilitator, you aren't interested in what participants say to you, but rather what
they say to each other.

In the workshop you will need selected key project stakeholders, selected key users,
domain experts, and members of the development team, including test/QA people.

Eight to twelve people are good. It's sometimes hard to limit attendees to that
number, but do it.

Set participants in a comfortable workspace with a big worktable and lots of wall
space for hanging posters. Include markers, tape, 3" x 5" index cards, and lots of
snacks to keep the less busy people occupied.

You're hosting a party.


Step 2. Capture and annotate user roles.

The term "actor" refers to any of job title, user role, or a mixture of both. We are
after "roles," phrases that indicates what particular users' goals are. I always look
for "thing doer" phrases to describe a role, or even, "adjectived thing doer," to make
it more specific (only in English can a noun describing an adjective be used as a
verb in the past tense!).

For example, we might find an "order taker" in the store situation, or a "special-
order taker," or even better, a "hurried special-order taker." To handle customers
who are angry because the special order is late, we find a "late-order researcher" or
a "complaint handler." (People with such titles as sales associate and manager
perform all the roles.) The extended role name makes it easier to keep the role clear
enough so that anyone, with or without special domain knowledge, can understand
what the role might be doing. It lets us know the person performing in this role is in
a hurry and needs functionality and a user-interface that can support that.

Brainstorm user roles onto index cards"card-storming," as Constantine and
Lockwood (Constantine 1999) call it. After card-storming, refine your role list by
removing duplicates and verifying the names are clear. Good names are important.
We won't be relying on pages of documentation to describe each role, so the name
is all you've got. Make sure it's expressive.

You are likely to name roles that you might consider stakeholders of the system, not
necessarily users. Don't discard these. It's important to consider the goals of these
people. It's important to ask how the software could support those goals. I often
find that roles that might have been set aside as stakeholders actually need
functionality in the system that supports proving to them that their interests were
protected.

On the index card, write the role's primary goal or goals under the role name. What
constitutes success for this user in using the system? What constitutes failure? We
will keep checking that the requirements we capture really help user roles meet
their goals.

Write only what constitutes success from the user role's perspective, not his boss's
or some other stakeholder's. For example, a call center employee in a credit card
service center, a "credit card application taker" might have a goal to take
applications quickly enough and accurately enough to avoid a manager's attention.
The manager, on the other hand, might want to improve speed and accuracy and
reduce customer complaints. Other stakeholders may be concerned with up-selling
credit insurance policies. The manager's and stakeholder's goals aren't necessarily
those of the "credit card application taker." Make sure the appropriate goal finds its
way onto the appropriate role card. If you want to capture the other stakeholders'
needs, consider adding some roles, such as "efficiency watcher" and "up-selling
watcher," and create role cards for them.

Write on each card a subjective estimate of that role's business value or importance,
high, medium, or low. I mark H, M, or L on the lower left corner of the card.

Write on each card an estimate of how often the role will use the system. This can
be high, medium, low, or hourly, daily, monthly, quarterly, yearly, or some other
frequency you find suitable. I write these on the lower right hand corner of the card.


  Figure 3-11. The role modeling session. Be sure to listen for the
   conversations that occur during this process. (Courtesy of Jeff
                                       Patton)




Step 3. Construct the user role model.

In this step you understand and mark the relationships, dependencies, and
collaborations between roles. The result is the agile version of a role model.

Using a sheet of poster paper, the participants will cluster the user role cards on the
table. The only important instruction to give is, "Try to cluster. Keep roles similar to
each other close together, dissimilar roles farther apart." Once the model "feels"
right, fix the cards to the poster paper with tape.

The roles probably got clustered together because they have similar goals or
participate in the business process at similar times. Circle each cluster of roles.
Label each with some indication of why those roles got clustered.

Draw a line from each cluster to other clusters where a relationship exists. I might,
for example, draw a line from a cluster marked "order takers" to one marked "order
fulfillers" and label it "sends orders to."

Make any other notes of interest on the model, possibly including a notable business
rule, user role characteristic, or relationship across user roles.


Step 4. Identify the focal roles.
Participants now vote for the roles (not role clusters!) they consider being most
critical to the success of the software (including also the roles where dire
consequences follow when they fail in their goals). I usually only allow folks with
either domain expertise or strong and educated opinions to vote.


   Figure 3-12. A sample role-model. To those present during its
 creation, the marked-up sheet brings back a flood of conversation
             and information. (Courtesy of Jeff Patton)




To get the focal roles, I may give five voters three votes each. Since there's usually
candy (e.g., Hershey's kisses) on the table during our sessions, I like to use those
as voting tokens. Have people place the tokens directly on the role cards they find
most significant. Doing this with physical markers as opposed to just pen marks is
helpful to people making choices. I often find people who've used up their votes will
begin to lobby others to vote as they did, or vote for the role they didn't because
they ran out of votes. These are interesting conversations. I often see perhaps 3 or
5 or so roles picked out as focal from 15 to 25 roles on the table.
After everyone is done, replace the physical tokens with marks such as an "F" for
each vote. Write the F using a brightly colored ink. This makes it easy to find the
focal roles in a busy role model. Roles with the most Fs are easy to spot. I remind
folks to pay close attention to these.

You are likely to make interesting discoveries at this point, for example, that the
most-voted on, or focal, roles may not be the ones with the highest business value
or have the highest usage frequency. Discuss your results. Make any interesting
notes directly on the model.


Step 5. Capture the tasks required to accomplish the goals.

Using the role model as reference, think of a person going to the system to perform
a task to meet their goal in that particular role. Write that task name onto an index
card. I like task names that start with a verb, such as "add items to order" or
"choose customer from known customers." Just as with role names, the task names
are important. The more clear and concise the tasks names, the less supporting
documentation you'll need for them.

"Card-storm" the user tasks using this thinking activity, covering all roles. When
there's likely to be a large number of tasks, I like to work on one cluster of roles at
a time. Remove duplicates and clarify task names.

For each task card, note three things directly on the card:

     The goal of this task. What is a successful outcome for the task?

     Its frequency. You can use high, medium, or low, or time references such as
     hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly.

     Its business value. This is a subjective best guess, high, medium, or low.


Step 6. Build the task model.

In this step, you will identify relationships and dependencies that tasks have with
each other, just as you did with the role model.


 Figure 3-13. Marking up the task model. Participants often invent
notation meaningful to the domain and to themselves. (Courtesy of
                           Jeff Patton)
Arrange the task cards on a fresh sheet of poster paper. Without having to match
the role clustering on the role model, cluster similar tasks and let dissimilar tasks
fall far apart. When the model feels right, fix the cards in place with tape.

As with the role model, circle and label clusters of cards, then look for relationships
between clusters. Draw and label relationship lines between the clusters.

See if you can spot a "timeline." Look for the task likely to be performed earliest.
Start there and draw a line connecting each subsequent task until you arrive at the
task likely to be performed last. I usually find the line runs from the upper left side
of the model down to the lower rightbut not always. The timeline helps to point out
the overall workflow from task to task.

The task model should be a concise picture of the work the system needs to
perform.


Step 7. Identify the focal tasks.

You need to understand and mark the tasks that are most critical to the success of
the software. Just as with the role model, everyone gets three votes, or perhaps
more if the task model has a large number of cards.

Have people vote for the tasks most critical to the software. What tasks deliver the
most value? What tasks are done the most frequently? Alternatively, think of the
tasks that if not done, or done incorrectly, can cause the most trouble. You can use
the candy again if it has not all been eaten by now.

Write an "F" for each vote directly on the cards. As with the role model, use a
brightly colored ink to write the Fs on the cards. Those are your focal tasks.

Look for interesting discoveries. Are there high-frequency tasks with high business
value that weren't voted as focal? Why? Are there low-frequency, low-value tasks
that were focal? Focal roles often perform focal tasks. Is this true of your models?
Interesting details arise out of discussing these points.
Step 8. Extract interaction contexts.

An interaction context is a place in the software where a user might go to perform
some of their tasks. It's the designer's job to find those places, organize them
appropriately, and then put the right tools there so the task execution goes
smoothly.

For example, if I were designing for a project called "my house," I might have some
tasks called "put away groceries," "make dinner," and "listen to radio." I might
decide those three tasks belong together in an interaction context I'll call "kitchen."
In my kitchen I'll put tools I need to perform the tasks: a refrigerator, a stove, pots
and pans, and a radio. You'll find interaction contexts in the software you use every
day.

You'll find that the clusters in your task model are likely to be interaction contexts.
The tasks clustered together because they were similar for some reasonoften
because they're performed at similar times by similar user roles.

Name each interaction context and write the name on a 3" x 5" card. Arrange these
cards on yet another sheet of poster paper. Fix them with tape when the
arrangement feels right. Draw lines between each interaction context card to
indicate how a user might navigate from one context to another. This is a navigation
map.

At this point you should start to be able to visualize the software. A well-named
interaction context becomes a suitable module name and a good way to refer to the
tasks performed there (just as when I say "kitchen" you can quickly imagine the
kinds of tasks I might do there). You may find it useful to index sections of the
project plan by interaction context. It's easier to explain that you are working on the
"order processing" functions than it is to itemize all the tasks individually.


Step 9. Identify an incremental release plan.

You have in front of you a set of poster sheets that show you the roles that will use
the system and the functions the system needs to provide them. What you still need
to discover is the order in which to deliver them to the user community. You may be
making multiple deliveries, in which case you want to deliver the functions in a
useful order. If you are only going to make a single delivery, then you still want to
develop and integrate the functions in the same order, for protection against the
worst-case situation, that is, you run out of time before getting to everything.

My preferred order is "highest composite business value." I use that phrase because
sometimes, to deliver a complete task thread, end-to-end, you actually have to
develop and integrate one or more tasks that have lower individual value. If you
don't include those tasks, then the users won't actually get full value from the most
valuable (focal) tasks. We want to deliver full business value, the composite value of
the entire thread of tasks along a work flow.
  Figure 3-14. A span plan, which lets you see both the work flow
    and possible releases at a glance. (Courtesy of Jeff Patton)




The shortest, most useful path is what I call a "system span."[10] Develop this first,
as an early victory to the users and what they will consider the walking skeleton of
the system functionality. Subsequent releases will incrementally add features to that
system span.

  [10] Borrowed from Lean Software Development (Poppendieck 2003).



To build the incremental release plan, make a copy of the task cards. You can hand
copy all the task cards. I find that keying them into a spreadsheet then printing
them onto cards using a word processor works well. I do this during a break or at
lunch that same day.

Place each task card on a (fresh) poster sheet according to its time and criticality.

       Time runs from left to right, referring to when a user role might perform that
       particular task.

       Business criticality runs top (most important) to bottom (least important).
       Criticality refers to how necessary the task is to perform (optional tasks will
       never be on the top row).

You'll find the task cards start to arrange themselves in rows. The top row will
contain critical tasks arranged in time order. Each subsequent row will contain other,
less critical tasks, also in time order. Draw a line directly under the top row. This is
the system span, the smallest set of features that can be released to perform an
end-to-end business process flow.

Finally, it's the developers' turn. Have the developers present give rough
development time estimates on each task card.[11] Course-grain estimates are fine at
this point. I often restrict the estimates to 1 week at a minimum, 3 or 4 at a
maximum. Draw lines left to right across the model where you'd like to group tasks
for future releases. What you have here isn't the project schedule, but a way of
identifying similarly sized clusters of function to develop in each iteration, that is,
useful information for building the project map.

  [11] Notes from Alistair: First, these should be seen as relative sizing estimates, not elapsed time estimates. It can be damaging to commit to a
  development schedule so quickly. I would recheck these numbers later using blitz planning, because you are likely to find additional tasks to be done that
  weren't noticed during the rush of this workshop.



This concludes the session, exhausting but fun work that strengthens relationships
between the users, sponsors, and developers.

Be sure to place the flip charts prominently in the development area as information
radiators, constantly reminding the developers of the product features, the focal
roles and focal tasks, and the conversations around how they came to be. This
allows the developers to see the software through the eyes of those user roles
rather than through the eyes of a project manager, developer, or tester.


Deriving the UI

When it comes time to develop the UI prototype, consider a technique described by
Constantine, Windl, Noble, and Lockwood,[12] which I [Jeff] also practice and have
slightly modified to suit my personal style.

  [12] http://www.foruse.com/articles/canonical.htm.



Do the following for each user task, on poster sheets:

       Write in two columns a synopsis of the dialog between the user and the
       system. Put the User Intentions in the left column and the corresponding
       System Responsibilities in the right. This is what Constantine calls an
       "essential use-case" (Constantine 1999).

       Place sticky notes next to the user intentions and system responsibilities that
       will be UI elements. Put those for input areas and user actions on the left side
       and those for information containers on the right side. For example, a user
       intention such as "user identifies self" suggests two input areas and one action
       (name, password, some sort of "GO" button). Write "username" and
       "password" on two sticky notes. Write "action" on a third, or just use one with
       a different size or color to indicate its presence. Stick all three next to the
       phrase "user identifies self." For a phrase such as "system displays open
       orders,"you want a component showing a list of orders. Write "list of orders"
       on a sticky note and put it next to the phrase "system displays open orders."
       When you're done, the use case should be spotted with sticky notes.
     Transfer the sticky notes to another flip chart, representing screens the user
     will see, placing them in areas that seem appropriate for the user interface of
     the system. When you're comfortable with the placement, replace each sticky
     note with a simple line drawing of the component drawn approximately the
     size you'd expect the component to appear on the user interface. Do this with
     each component. You now have what is called a "wire-frame" drawing of the
     user interface.

Test the wire-frame user interface by referring back to the use case. One participant
plays a user role performing the task, the other plays the role of the system. Make
sure the user interface you've designed supports easy performance of the task.


Usability Inspection (during Design)

It is time to inspect your (running) design.

Project the running software onto a wall big enough for a group of participants to
easily see it.

Choose a participant to perform the user role that will be using the part of the
software being inspected. I prefer someone not familiar with the functionality. Give
that person a task or list of tasks to perform that are chosen from the task model
you drew at the start of the project or from the essential use cases.

The person performing the task explains out loud what he or she is doing. As the
system displays information, you can explain what they're seeing. Everyone in the
room notes defects or suggested changes on index cards.

After the tasks have been performed on the system, collect the cards. Eliminate
duplicates, clarify issues, and prioritize the issues to be addressed by the
development team. (Don't be depressed if you find dozens of issues on your first
pass, that's normal. Just make sure you address the issues.)

Repeat this process as necessary until the user interactions move smoothly when
executing the tasks.


QA Testing the System Personalities

Finally, you will need to confirm that the finished software is appropriate for the user
role that will be using it. We often have a QA person pretend to be a user in the part
of a role indicated by the role model.

For each role in the role model, assume the knowledge and goals of that role. Use
the role description and any other information you can gather about the people who
might step into that role. Method acting skills come in handy here.

Perform all the tasks assigned to that role using the running system, and write
down, as though you were a person in that role, any problems you feel the person
will have.
You may find you perform the same task many times. Each time, though, you'll be
doing it from a different user role's perspective, and evaluating it differently.


Jeff summarizes:

  User-centric design leverages information about users' traits and goals
  throughout the development process and ultimately validates the system
  against that information. I've found this generally results in easier to use
  software that the actual end-users are happier with. I've found we generally
  have far less rework on finished features and we discover fewer unanticipated
  features late in development.


Technique 7. Process Miniature

Any new process is unfamiliar and perplexing. The longer the process duration, the
longer before new team members understand how the various parts of the process
fit with each other. You can speed this understanding by shrinking the time taken by
the process, using the process miniature. Here are three examples of its use:

  A large organization, using a methodology much larger than Clear, put each
  new employee through a one-week project. By the end of that project, the
  new employee had exercised every part of the process. He or she could then
  work on a real project knowing the connection between all the process
  activities and work products.

  "Extreme hour" was invented by Peter Merel to introduce people to XP in 60
  minutes.[13] The group runs two half-hour iterations: 10 minutes for the
  planning game, 15 minutes to develop a solution and acceptance tests, 5
  minutes for acceptance testing. The group runs through the process twice so
  they can experience reducing project scope partway through an iteration,
  pushing features from one iteration to the next iteration, and adding and
  shifting requirements within and across iterations. To make development time
  work in 15 minutes, the team designs something arbitrary, such as a
  mousetrap or a fishing device, and only draws their design on overhead
  transparencies.

  For a small, 50-person company with 16 programmers, I once ran a 90-minute
  process miniature that required programming, test creation, check-
  in/checkout, and integration across three architectural tiers. We used two 45-
  minute iterations and a very, very simple programming problem: an up-down
  counter run through a Web interface. It took us two tries to get through the
  problem in the 90 minutes. The first try we used as a practice session to
  understand what was being requested. The second try was done live in front of
  the entire company as a demo of the working method.

     [13] http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?ExtremeHour.
You may wish to introduce Crystal Clear by using a process miniature somewhere
between ninety minutes and one day. This might be done before the initial
methodology shaping workshop, or just after, so the team can "taste" their new
methodology. The methodology shaping workshop itself can be sampled by running
it in a very digested form lasting only half an hour, just so the team can learn how it
works on a "safer" topic than their project.

Many techniques can be introduced using a process miniature to reduce the problem
that people have with starting to use an unfamiliar process. You might run your first
reflection workshop in just fifteen minutes as a process miniature. I run a process
miniature for writing use cases in my use case course so that people can see the
overall picture before we get into details.


Technique 8. Side-by-Side Programming

"Programming in pairs" involves two people working on one programming
assignment at a single workstation.[14] Some people find this to be too much
togetherness. Side-by-side programming allows them to get some of the effects of
pair programming without giving up their individual (programming or other)
assignments.

  [14] See Pair Programming Illuminated (Williams 2002).



In side-by-side programming, two people sit close enough to see each others'
screens easily, but work on their own assignments. This is an amplification of
osmotic communication for the programming context.

In Figure 3-15, Justin and Andrew have set the workstations so that the monitors
are just two feet apart. The idea is that Justin should only have to turn his head or
lean over a bit to see Andrew's screen. Then, they can work on their own respective
assignments, but each can ask the other at any moment to look at a piece of code,
run a test, or similar.


 Figure 3-15. Side-by-side programming. (Courtesy of Jeff Patton,
          Justin Johnson, Andrew Lawrence, and Tomax)
Studies have shown that design-and code-reviews are cost-effective ways to reduce
defects in the software (McConnell 1998). People find it hard to find the energy and
interest to either call a code-review meeting or attend one. Being right next to each
other, however, these two people can examine and comment on small amounts of
code in short amounts of time, with little ceremony or disruption to their work. It
provides the "peer code peering" described by Crystal in the first of the e-mails at
the start of the book.

The developers who first told me of this method said it allowed them to work in
parallel on their programming, so they were not both occupied by the same task. At
the same time, they could review each other's code as called for by the complexity
of the code. They were programming a client-server system at the time, one
working on the client, the other on the server. One could say to the other, "I've got
the stub compiled. Can you test it?" The other would run the system, and then
return to his programming while the first person fixed whatever bug showed up in
the test.

Another senior developer commented that he spent most of the day writing reports
and managing conversations, rather than programming. Having him sit just two feet
away from another programmer meant that he could be useful as a coach and a
second pair of eyes without having to give up his nonprogramming work.

Jim Coplien has speculated that full-time pair programming is not the optimal
amount of time for people to spend together.[15] Side-by-side programming allows
people to mix and match the time they spend on the same task and on separate
tasks.

  [15] Personal communication.
As with many of the ideas in Crystal Clear, you may find side-by-side programming
to be a useful stepping-stone to doing Extreme Programming, or as a fall-back in
case people do not take to the full XP practice.


Technique 9. Burn Charts

Burn charts have become a favorite way to give visibility into a project's progress.
They are extremely simple and astonishingly powerful. They reveal the strategy
being used, show the progress made against predictions, and open the door to
discussions about how best to proceed, including the difficult discussions about
whether to cut scope or extend the schedule. They have a natural mapping to the
earned value charts used in military/government projects. They should use part of
your standard bag of tricks for project planning and reporting.

It turns out that packing a house has striking similarities to software development
as far as planning and tracking go. I use the following exercise to illustrate the use
of burn charts:

  Imagine you have 30 days to pack up a house you are living in (with a couple
  of kids, just to make it more painful). Assume there are 14 rooms (or room
  equivalents) on 3 floors. Chart your plan so that you always know what is
  done, what is left, and how well you are doing.

Most people plan to pack the house as shown in Figure 3-16. They plan to first
throw out all the junk, then pack the noncritical items, and pack the essential living
items in the last few days. This is, of course, the technique I used the first two
times I was in this situation, and I can speak with firsthand pain in saying that it is
terrible.


        Figure 3-16. Scheduling with no definitive milestones.
The big flaw in it is the absence of clear intermediate milestones.

It is practically impossible to tell whether one is 60 percent or 70 percent done
(speaking to both software and room packing). For most of the project, one sees
neither the true size of the task at hand, nor the (slower than expected) rate of
progress. Missing both of those, it is impossible to tell when one will get done. In
both cases, an ugly surprise awaits at the end when a myriad of little unexpected
items suddenly become visible (think about when you loaded all the boxes into a
moving truck and walked back into the house, only to discover all sorts of things
that suddenly "appeared" when everything else was taken out). The classical result
on software projects is that programmers keep reporting that things are 80 percent
complete, or "We'll be done when we're done."

The repair is to find "interesting" and clear intermediate milestones.

In packing, those milestones are rooms completely packed and empty, containing
"not even a sock" (and possibly with police tape across the doorway to keep people
from dumping stuff back into them!). The thinking is that if there is so much as a
sock left, then there is possibly something else besides the sock, and the reporting
is flawed. We will see an application of this "sock" idea in just a few pages.

In software, those milestones are the delivery of running, tested code, as described
in the section on frequent delivery.

This new strategy has implications that make life a little awkward (again, both for
software and house packing). In house packing, people have to move out of their
rooms, and eventually the kitchen becomes unusable. In software, tests have to be
rerun, and designs and documentation must be altered on each delivery. These are
not freecost and discomfort both come with the strategy.

The payback for the cost and the discomfort is improved visibility, improved
tracking, and less likelihood of an unexpected project overrun. In most cases, this
benefit is well worth the cost.

Let's look at this strategy on a software project.

     Make a list of all the items to be delivered. You might work from the project
     map, blitz planning, or XP's planning game. Associate with each delivery item
     a relative cost. Try to associate with each item also a relative business benefit,
     so that you can discuss with the executive sponsor the value being delivered
     to the business over time (Figure 3-17 shows a fragment of such a list). The
     reason for using relative estimates instead of absolute ones is that if you are,
     for example, 10 percent over on your first set of items, all the remaining items
     will scale accordingly. The burn charts will show this automatically.



       Figure 3-17. Extract of feature list with estimates of size and
                 business value. (Courtesy of Jeff Patton)


                                                                   Est.
                                                                        Est.Elapsed
            Feature            Feature Description        Value   Ideal
                                                                           Days
                                                                  Days


      1     User Interface     Allow the configuration              8
                               to populate


      1.1   Configuration      order line item             M        2          5
            generates order    comments with detailed
            line item          configuration
            comments           information along with
                               configuration
                               comments. Stop change
                               of line item notes other
                               than from within the
                               appropriate
                               configurator.
                                                             Est.
                                                                  Est.Elapsed
      Feature            Feature Description        Value   Ideal
                                                                     Days
                                                            Days


1.2   Configurator UI Rework user-interface          H       6        15
      Rework: Verbose to match the prototye
      wizard style    discussed in
                      collaborative review
                      session. Fast, simple
                      data entry. No
                      unnecessary frills.


1.3   Configuration     Configuration is passed      H       5       12.5
      generates         current order customer
      customer specific for use in determining
      pricing           customer specific
                        pricing.


1.4   Allow adding a    Currently a configured        L      2         5
      configuration and blind may be added to
      continue          an order. To add a
                        subsequent similar blind
                        you'd need to go back
                        into configurator and
                        reenter all the
                        information. This
                        feature would allow the
                        user to accept a finished
                        configuration and
                        immediately allow
                        adding an additional
                        configuration using the
                        data from the previous
                        configuration.


2     Special Order PO                                       5
      Generation
                                                             Est.
                                                                  Est.Elapsed
      Feature            Feature Description        Value   Ideal
                                                                     Days
                                                            Days


2.1   PO generated       Currently POs are           H       5       12.5
      correctly for      generated for regular
      configuration      order line items.
                         Change to allow
                         configuration
                         components to generate
                         one or more purchase
                         orders at a cost
                         furnished by the
                         component.


2.2   Create/confirm     Confirm that a vendor       H       1.5     3.75
      vendor items       item exists for each sku
      exist for skus     used for base window
                         treatments and options.
                         Where no vendor item
                         exists for an assigned
                         vendor, dynamically
                         create the vendor item.


2.3   PO generation is   Currently Pos can be         L      4        10
      automatic          generated after a
                         special order is saved
                         and a deposit is made.
                         Allow automatic PO
                         generation immediately
                         after deposit is
                         tendered, or
                         immediately if no
                         deposit is required.


3     Advanced Order                                         9


3.1   Advanced Order Alter Advanced Order            M       4        10
      form shows more form to show an
      details         "overflow" for each line
                      item where additional
                      information such as
                      comments, Po number,
                      PO order date etc., can
                      be shown.
Sort and sequence the work items by development dependency, cost, and
value, and cluster them into a sequence, as shown in Figure 3-18 (you may
recognize the similarity of what we are doing here and what happens in a blitz
planning session).



Figure 3-18. The Iceberg List with Product Backlog. (Courtesy
                       of Jeff Patton)


                                           Raw
                                                     Estimated
            Feature                      Dev.Time
Module                        Value                   Elapsed Release #
            Name                          (ideal
                                                       Days
                                          days)


1.1         Configuration        M           2            5            1
            generates
            order line item
            comments


1.2         Configrator UI       H           6           15            1
            rework:
            Verbose
            wizard style


2.1         PO generated         H           5          12.5           1
            correctly for
            configuration


2.2         Create/confirm       H          1.5         3.75           1
            vendor items
            exist for skus


3.1         Advanced             M           4           10            1
            Order form
            shows more
            details


3.2         Order fulfilled      H           2            5            1
            at PO cost
                                      Raw
                                               Estimated
         Feature                    Dev.Time
Module                      Value               Elapsed Release #
         Name                        (ideal
                                                 Days
                                     days)


3.3      Repeat orders       M         3         7.5        1
         works with
         blind
         configurations


3.4      Configuration        L        1         2.5        1
         comments are
         viewable, not
         editable


4.1      Base hierarchy      H        1.5        3.75       1
         change


4.2      Style can           H         2          5         1
         locate price
         charts based
         on color
         selection


4.3      Assign specific     H         2          5         1
         color group
         colors to price
         charts


4.4      Separate            H         2          5         1
         messages
         from options


4.5      Separate            H         2          5         1
         questions from
         options


1.3      Configuration       H         5         12.5       2
         generates
         customer
         specific pricing
                                      Raw
                                               Estimated
         Feature                    Dev.Time
Module                      Value               Elapsed Release #
         Name                        (ideal
                                                 Days
                                     days)


1.4      Allow adding a       L        2          5         2
         configuration
         and continue


2.3      PO generation        L        4          10        2
         is automatic


3.5      Order shows          L        2          5         2
         sq. footage &
         running length


3.6      Vendor               L        2          5         2
         orderable
         items show
         additional
         detail


3.7      Printed             M         6          15        2
         window
         treatments
         show
         disclaimers


3.8      Allow order         H         2          5         2
         line item
         copying


4.1      Associate style      L        1         2.5        2
         with Retail.net
         DCL


4.11     Grid validation      L        1         2.5        2


4.6      Assign              H         3         7.5        2
         customer
         specific selling
         discounts
                                                                                      Raw
                                                                                               Estimated
                                Feature                                             Dev.Time
       Module                                                        Value                      Elapsed Release #
                                Name                                                 (ideal
                                                                                                 Days
                                                                                     days)


       4.7                      Customer                                  H            1         2.5        2
                                lookup


       4.8                      Customer                                 M             1         2.5        2
                                account type
                                lookup


       4.9                      Options may                               L            3         7.5        2
                                have required
                                questions




       Estimate how much can be accomplished in each iteration or delivery period.
       Draw a line under the last item that fits in each. Number the releases.

I have come to call this the Iceberg List. The "above water" part lists all the items
that can be delivered in the current delivery cycle. The "below water" part lists
every item that will be delivered in later delivery cycles. The name reflects that
when you add a new item to the above water part, it pushes everything else down,
and something that was above water falls below water (will not be delivered in the
current delivery cycle). The iceberg list is particularly useful on projects where the
requirements change frequently. In Scrum terminology, the below water part is
referred to the Product Backlog and the above water part is the Sprint Backlog.[16]

  [16] More about Scrum's backlogs is online at http://wiki.scrums.org/index.cgi.



The primary difference between this list and the standard systems engineering
work-breakdown structure is that you get no credits for any item that does not
result in running, tested code. Okay, you also get credit for final deliverables such as
training materials and delivery documentation.

       At this point you can make a burn-up chart (Figure 3-19). Mark either relative
       work units or percent complete on the vertical axis, and calendar time on the
       horizontal. Draw a line from the origin to the completion point, either by
       estimating the rate at which work can be accomplished, or as often happens,
       the "drop dead" delivery deadline. That shows the "planned" progress.
       Figure 3-19. The burn-up chart quickly shows progress and
           earned value. The long thin line shows the planned
     functionality and schedule; the short thick line shows progress
                                 to date.




After each iteration, mark how much relative work got completed. You will find that
with just two marks on the chart you can see how far slower you are moving than
you expected! Yes, that may be bad news, but at least it is bad news detected early,
as opposed to bad news detected too late to do anything about it!

The burn-up chart resembles the classical earned-value chart (Lett 1998, Fleming
1988). The essential difference is that people traditionally include on the earned-
value chart tasks completed, whether or not they resulted in code getting
integrated. On agile projects, credit is only given when code is integrated and tested
(the "no leftover sock" rule). The agile strategy yields more reliable information
about the project's actual state than the general one.

The burn-up chart has many nice features.

     It shows both the status and rate of progress ("velocity") in a way that is both
     clear and easy to discuss.

     If you plot business value on the vertical axis instead of development effort,
     you get a chart that properly shows how much value you have delivered over
     time. Plotting both on the same chart may help remind the team about where
     the real business value lies in their work. If you sequence the iceberg list to
     float the greatest business value items to the top, and track business value
     delivered, then no matter when the project gets terminated, it will be clear to
     everyone that they got the most business value in the time spent.

     Finally, the burn-up chart is a key part of a good one-page project status
     report (examples of status reports are shown in the Chapter 5). Such one-
     page status sheets simplify the work of executives looking at reports from
     many projects.

Even though the burn-up chart is very nice, there is a nasty surprise if you are not
careful in choosing the units you use for the vertical axis.

In house packing, the obvious unit of estimation and tracking is the packing box. In
programming, the obvious unit is the line of code (LOC). These are convenient and
give wonderful detail.

The problem is that you won't know the actual number of boxes or lines of code
needed until the very end (shades of "We'll be done when we're done"). The graph
tracks rate wonderfully, but progress poorly. Not only will you not discover bad news
early, but also you will not know how many boxes or LOC you need until the last
item is packed or programmed. That is too late.


Figure 3-20. A burn-up chart when the wrong units are measured.




The repair is to choose a unit of measure that can't possibly expand. In house
packing, the replacement measure is easy: use rooms instead of boxes (it would be
quite a surprise to discover a new room after you have packed all the rest). The
answer is not generally obvious on a software project. You may be lucky and have a
relatively stable number of use cases, or a fixed number of modules to replace, but
there is no generally applicable answer.

I met two teams that had found an answer for themselves. They were doing system
replacement projects where the subsystems communicated in a workflow pattern.
Their nonexpanding unit was the workflow component. These teams were able to
color each subsystem yellow as they started work on it, and then green as it was
completed. They were able to use "components replaced" as their nonexpanding
unit (see the sample status sheet in Chapter 5).

In the more usual situation, project scope does in fact change over time. Phil
Goodwin and Russ Rufer introduced[17] the idea of marking the raising and lowering
of the ceiling, or 100 percent mark, as the project progresses. This charting allows
the team to show the original plan and actual accomplishments even in the face of
scope changes. Figure 3-21 shows the Goodwin-Rufer style burn-up chart in a
situation where the team actually performed better than their estimates but had to
deliver increasing scope. (The project actually used the standard Scrum burn-down
chart shown in Figure 3-24. I think you will agree that their conversations with the
sponsors would have been easier had they used either Figure 3-21 or 3-26.)

  [17] Private communication




      Figure 3-21. A burn-up chart showing predicted and actual
      accomplishments, and changing 100 percent line, using the
                        Goodwin-Rufer style.
Figure 3-24. Scrum-style burn-down chart as shown to the project
                  sponsors (after Cohn 2004).




  Figure 3-26. Burn-down chart for the same project using the
          "down" version of the Goodwin-Rufer chart.
If you are lucky enough to have a good nonexpanding unit of measure, then you can
use the burn-down chart, which some people find emotionally more powerful.


                     Figure 3-22. The burn-down chart.




The burn-down chart is emotionally powerful because there is a special feeling about
hitting the number zero that helps people get excited about completing their work
and pressing forward. I can speak firsthand in saying that as soon as we shifted our
house packing chart to using rooms as the unit of measure and put the rooms on a
burn-down chart, our confidence that we would actually meet our schedule
increased dramatically. I have seen the same apply to a software project team.

It is easy to say, "We can't use the burn-down chart, because nothing is fixed on a
software project." Oddly, the first people to say this were those working on the
system replacement project just mentioned. After a bit of examination, we
discovered that they had the house-packing problem in front of them. They were
able to convert immediately to the burn-down chart, using replaced subsystems as
their nonexpanding unit of measure.


There are three wrinkles left to discuss.

The first is the little white lie I just told in the last paragraph about nonexpanding
unit of work. The team discovered after a short while that their executive sponsor
kept adding demands for new functionality in both the old system and the
replacement. In other words, although they were promised that the scope would be
fixed (since the time and budget was), that wasn't really true. As if that were not
bad enough, he was actually opposed to the project itself, and was obliged to
support it only because of pressure from the user community (see how powerful
user community support can be!).

This put the team in a damned-if-you-do-and-damned-if-you-don't position. They
couldn't report that a subsystem was complete (not even a sock left in it) if he was
going to keep throwing more socks back into the room, and they couldn't stop him
from throwing more socks in.

Their eventual strategy has some bearing on burn charts, but also some bearing on
the positive role of intermediate managers. The intermediate manager decided that
they would take their project mission as originally stated to replace the existing
system. They would deliver that successfully, and track all increased scope as
growing "post-replacement" activity.

They charted this as shown in Figure 3-23. With this strategy and chart, they were
able to keep their focus on the critical issue of replacing the existing system, show
they were tracking the new functions being added, and keep the executive sponsor
from derailing their project.


Figure 3-23. The burn-down chart for a hard-deadline project with
                scope increase added at the end.




Mike Cohn reports a similar situation in his (2004) book User Stories, although in
friendly circumstances. The team was given 130 story points (a relative unit of size
for XP user stories) to deliver in three iterations. After each iteration, the sponsors
added new stories, and the team revised the relative sizes of the remaining stories.
Both increased the estimate of the amount of work remaining. Mike and I discussed
how they should chart the team's progress against changing scope, assuming they
like the emotional power of the burn-down chart.
Figure 3-24 shows what the team showed the sponsors at their meetings (Cohn
2004). Mike and I felt that this chart conceals very important information. Figure 3-
25 shows how I thought to modify the chart to illustrate the actual accomplishments
against the changing scope, and Figure 3-26 shows how Mike proposed to modify
the chart to show the changing situation. You may notice that Figure 3-26 is the
downward version of the Goodwin-Rufer burn-up chart.


 Figure 3-25. Burn-down chart for the same project showing scope
                   increase after each iteration.




We offer these examples of charts to show different ways in which you can show
predicted and actual accomplishments with simplicity and expressive power. There
are probably more variations to discover, but these should get you started.

The second wrinkle to be discussed is the size of the selected unit of measure. This
is very relevant at the start of a project because the team will almost always move
more slowly at the beginning than expected, and just how much more slowly is a
valuable piece of information.

Let us return to the house packing example to see this clearly. The graphs in Figure
3-27 show that the coarser the unit of measure, the longer the blackout period
during which no information is available. Having already rejected "boxes packed" as
a good unit of measure, we can choose "rooms packed" or "floors packed" as
nonexpanding units.


  Figure 3-27. Burn-down charts for two different base units. The
      smaller the unit, the shorter the initial blackout period.
Figure 3-27 shows burn-down charts for both of those choices. In both cases, the
people fall behind at the same rate. However, with floors as units, they don't
discover how bad the news is until a third of the way through the project, which is a
relatively long time. Using rooms as units, they discover how bad the news is after
only a few days. The moral of the story is to choose the smaller nonexpandable unit
of measure.


The final item to discuss is handling items that change priorities. This gets us back
to the iceberg list, which has shown great utility on projects in which the priorities
change frequently and violently.

  A large project was delivering value to a customer on a regular basis. The
  customer would change work assignments and priorities so often and so late
  that no project plan was meaningful. The customer was, however, happy with
  the software being delivered, so they kept requesting more work done.

  In desperation, the project manager just put all requested features into a
  single prioritized list with estimated sizes. He announced that whatever was
  above the "water line," as calculated from the size estimates and team's
  velocity, would get delivered in the next release, and everything else would be
  delivered "later." The customer could insert, remove, modify, or reprioritize
  features at any time, even affecting the current release. Without resorting to
  argument, all parties could calculate what would reach delivery during this
  cycle and what was pushed back.

The name iceberg list comes from the rising and sinking effect the list shows:
adding high-priority items to the top of the list causes some above-water items to
sink below the water line; removing above-water items may cause a new item rise
above the water line. Just as with an iceberg, the above-water portion is only a
fraction of the total size.

The iceberg list is useful in hostile environments, where the sponsors change the
requirements and priorities on a daily basis and without warning. In such an
environment, post the current iceberg list in a highly visible place, and make sure
the contents of the next releases are derived rather than argued.

Figure 3-28 shows how this works, starting from the example in Figure 3-18. The
size estimates have changed, and "automated PO generation" got moved above the
water line. As a result, "separate messages/questions from options" fell below the
water line and got deferred to a later release.



 Figure 3-28. The iceberg list from Figure 3-18 revised on the
                       second iteration.


                                                 Raw Dev. Revised
                                                   Time    Ideal Release
Module Feature Name                     Value
                                                  (ideal   Days     #
                                                  days) Estimate


1.1     Configuration generates           M          2         2.6        1
        order line item comments


1.2     Configrator UI rework:             H         6         7.8        1
        Verbose wizard style


2.1     PO generated correctly for         H         5         6.5        1
        configuration


2.2     Create/confirm vendor items        H        1.5         2         1
        exist for skus


2.3     PO generation is                  H          4         5.2        2
        automatic


3.1     Advanced Order form shows         M          4         5.2        1
        more details


3.2     Order fulfilled at PO cost         H         2         2.6        1
                                              Raw Dev. Revised
                                                Time    Ideal Release
Module Feature Name                   Value
                                               (ideal   Days     #
                                               days) Estimate


3.3   Repeat orders works with         M         3       3.9     1
      blind configurations


3.4   Configuration comments are        L        1       1.3     1
      viewable, not editable


4.1   Base hierarchy change            H        1.5      2       1


4.2   Style can locate price charts    H         2       2.6     1
      based on color selection


4.3   Assign specific color group      H         2       2.6     1
      colors to price charts


4.4   Separate messages from           H         2       2.6     1
      options


4.5   Separate questions from          H         2       2.6     1
      options


1.3   Configuration generates          H         5       6.5     2
      customer specific pricing


1.4   Allow adding a configuration      L        2       2.6     2
      and continue


3.5   Order shows sq. footage &         L        2       2.6     2
      running length


3.6   Vendor orderable items show       L        2       2.6     2
      additional detail


3.7   Printed window treatments        M         6       7.8     2
      show disclaimers
                                               Raw Dev. Revised
                                                 Time    Ideal Release
Module Feature Name                    Value
                                                (ideal   Days     #
                                                days) Estimate


3.8    Allow order line item copying    H         2       2.6     2


4.1    Associate style with              L        1       1.3     2
       Retail.net DCL


4.11   Grid validation                   L        1       1.3     2


4.6    Assign customer specific         H         3       3.9     2
       selling discounts


4.7    Customer lookup                  H         1       1.3     2


4.8    Customer account type            M         1       1.3     2
       lookup


4.9    Options may have required         L        3       3.9     2
       questions
REFLECTION ABOUT THE STRATEGIES AND TECHNIQUES
Crystal Clear states explicitly that no strategy or technique is mandatory. Why do I
describe these particular ones and not others?

Both shaping the methodology and reflective improvement are required elements of
Crystal Clear, even though no specific technique is mandated for them. Most people
have never seen these things, and need to see a sample to get started.

The particular Reflection Workshop technique I describe is short and efficient and
lets people both voice their thoughts and then get back to work. If you are doing
any sort of monthly retrospective that allows free discussion, then you should be
able to try different styles of workshops in successive months and generate your
own personal style within a few months.

I describe Blitz Planning as an alternative to XP's "planning game." The two differ in
three ways:

     The planning game cards list user stories, and the blitz planning cards list
     tasks.

     The planning game has the people assume there are no dependencies between
     stories, while blitz planning has people analyze the dependencies between
     tasks;

     The planning game assumes fixed-length iterations, while blitz planning does
     not assume anything about iteration length.

There are times when these differences are of interest. Blitz planning lets the team

     See the shape of the work ahead of them (producing the project map)

     Work out where the walking skeleton should show up and what it might consist
     of

     Work out the smallest set of tasks before revenue can start flowing

     Report to the sponsors the number of internal tasks that need to be performed
     before useful functionality becomes visible

These differences are of particular importance at the start of the project. Later in
the project, the team may be able to simply list the features to be developed and
their relative development costs.

The Process Miniature lets people build a short internal movie of how a new process
works. Since moving to Crystal Clear is likely to involve quite a lot of change in
working habits, it helps reduce tension and uncertainty.
The Exploratory 360° gives people a chance to catch certain kinds of fatal mistakes,
mistakes that quite possibly everyone (incorrectly) assumes someone else has
already checked. Since the exploratory 360° does not take very long, it has a high
payback value for the time taken. It also aligns the team on the project's mission
and approach.

Early Victory, Walking Skeleton, and Incremental Rearchitecture fit together. Even
quite experienced developers disagree about how much architecture to develop
early in the project. These three strategies describe a way to take advantage of
incremental development to establish safety and value in the early stages of the
project, and still deal with the mistakes and learning that form a natural part of
architectural development.

Information Radiators are useful at every point in the project. Most agile teams
make great use of them, but most teams outside the agile community do not take
nearly enough advantage of these devices. It should be a pronounced strategy to
use all of the available wall space for capturing information of use to the project
team and their visitors (there is a danger of overloading the wall's visual space, but
I have only encountered one team who had reached that point). Once you start
using information radiators you may find you want to rearrange the office to make
more walls available.

The daily stand-up meeting was introduced in the Scrum methodology. I have heard
of people adding this single technique to every sort of project and methodology to
good effect, and so I am happy to spread its use.

I include Essential Interaction Design because there is so little literature on how to
work user-interface design and interaction design into an agile project. This
adaptation of usage-centered design fits into both XP and Crystal Clear projects. Jeff
Patton started an agile-usability discussion group, where you can pursue the topic.
[18]


       [18] http://groups.yahoo.com/group/agile-usability



Burn Charts are extremely useful in the planning stages of the project, because they
show the workload so clearly and people can respond with comments about the
plan's feasibility. They are also well suited as status reports for the same reason:
immediate clarity.

Crystal Clear lets a team use the techniques that work best for its members. I
rather expect that simply as the normal course of professional activity, Crystal Clear
practitioners will learn each of the techniques and strategies listed in this chapter,
and uncover many more as they go.
Chapter 4. Explored (The Process)
Crystal Clear uses nested cyclic processes of various lengths: the development
episode, the iteration, the delivery period, and the full project. What people do at
any moment depends on where they are in each of the cycles. This chapter
linearizes the cycles to the extent possible and points out some of their interactions.

Most of the development processes described from 1970 through 2000 were
described as sequences of steps, even when the process recommended iterations
and increments. This always caused confusion among readers. The text appeared to
dictate a "waterfall" process, while the authors kept asserting it was not.

These linear-looking process descriptions suffer from two problems. The first is that
they really describe the dependency graph between work products, the workflow. A
dependency graph should be read in back-to-front order: The team cannot deliver
the system until it is integrated and runs. They cannot integrate and test the code
until it is written and running. They can't design and write the code until they learn
what the requirements are (and so on). The workflow graph does not mandate a
waterfall process; it simply reflects dependencies.

When a process is described by a workflow dependency graph, people mentally treat
the dependency graph picture as encouragement to complete each mentioned work
product before starting on the next work product in the graph. This is rarely a good
strategy in software development. When looking at a workflow dependency graph,
the relevant questions to ask are these:

       How many requirements, at what level of completion, are needed before
       design can usefully get started? (The answers are "relatively few" and
       "relatively low," respectively.)

       How much of the system must be designed and programmed before useful
       integration and testing can be done? (The answer is "relatively little.")

       How much of the system, at what level of correctness, is needed before being
       useful to the users or suitable for user review? (The answers are "relatively
       little" and "relatively low," respectively.)

The low levels of each actually needed comes as a surprise to many people.

Concurrent development is the name given when work proceeds in parallel on
dependent work products. In concurrent development, many or all activities are in
play at the same time. People trade notes continually to keep abreast of the
changing state of each part. Concurrent development is not new, either to software
development or project management in general.[1] It is done by almost every project
team I visit, although few have noticed they do it.

  [1] Simultaneous Development (Laufer 1996) contains an excellent description of overlapped phases in civil engineering projects.
Concurrent development is described at length in Agile Software Development, in
the Gold Rush strategy in Surviving Object-Oriented Projects, and is generally
presupposed in most of my writings. Therefore, I won't try to describe concurrent
development here, nor the dependency graph in Crystal Clear (that should be quite
obvious). Removing these two topics allows me to describe other interesting aspects
of the process.

The second problem plaguing linear descriptions of process is that the processes
they are trying to describe are cyclic, using multiple cycles of differing lengths.[2]

  [2] I am indebted to Don Wells's description of XP as nested cycles. See http://www.extremeprogramming.org/map/loops.html.



I notice seven cycles in play on most projects:

       The project (a unit of funding, which could be any duration)

       The delivery cycle (a unit of delivery, one week to three months)

       The iteration (a unit of estimation, development and celebration, one week to
       three months)

       The work week

       The integration period (a unit of development, integration and system testing,
       30 minutes to three days)

       The work day

       The development episode (developing and checking in a section of code,
       taking a few minutes to a few hours)

Crystal Clear requires multiple deliveries per project, but not multiple iterations per
delivery. I will repeat this point several times, but I wish to draw your attention to it
right away.

Teams using short iteration periods inside a long delivery cycle sometimes add a
"supercycle" of perhaps four or six iterations, to provide an intermediate rhythm.
They use this supercycle to reflect on their process, to celebrate, to unwind. I will
not elaborate much on the supercycle in this chapter. Teams can derive what
elements of the iteration and delivery cycles to move to the supercycle.

Each cycle has its own sequencing, its own rhythm. In any given day, different
activities will be in play from the various cycles. The activities change from hour to
hour, day to day and week to week. This makes a complete linear description of the
process virtually impossible.

Figures 4-1 to 4-6 show several ways of unrolling these cycles. These simple
sketches have to omit some of the interactions between cycles, a few of which I'll
point out shortly. Notice that episodes, days, and integration periods can nest inside
an iteration in various ways (Figures 4-2 and 4-3 show two possible ways); there
are other valid combinations even more difficult to draw.


      Figure 4-1. Iteration and delivery cycles within a project.




 Figure 4-2. An iteration cycle, integrating multiple times per day.

                                 [View full size image]




  Figure 4-3. An iteration cycle with multiple days per integration.




Figure 4-4 shows the expansion of each cycle separately, listing specific activities
that occur specifically for that cycle type. Figure 4-5 shows these activities in a
plausible time sequence (vertically down the page), placing each activity in a
column for its cycle type.


     Figure 4-4. The cycles expanded to show specific activities.
      Figure 4-5. The activities in a plausible vertical sequence.




Finally, in Figure 4-6, I have unrolled all the cycles and shaded the cycles in
different ways so the activity can be connected to its cycle. The capital and small
letters stand for project Chartering, iteration planning, daily standup, development,
checkin, integration, Reflection workshop, Delivery, and project Wrap-up. Of course,
I had to choose one particular relationship between the daily cycle and the
integration cycle for this particular unrolling.


Figure 4-6. The cycles unrolled all the way to show daily activities.

                                                              [View full size image]




People interested in detail will notice that there is a line drawn through the R at the
end of the last iteration of a delivery cycle. That indicates that team does not
"reflect, deliver, reflect again," but rather, more naturally waits until after the actual
delivery, then reflects just once.

Another detail is that the planning session in the first iteration of a delivery cycle is
likely to have two parts: adjusting the coarse-grained project plan and creating a
fine-grained iteration plan.[3]

   [3] Thanks, Jeff Patton, for making this explicit to me.



These are the sorts of minor process adjustments that most teams make naturally,
but make cyclic process so hard to describe explicitly.

The following sections expand on all but the weekly cycle.
THE PROJECT CYCLE
A project as a cycle? Although each project is funded as a once-and-for-all activity,
it is typically followed by another project, in a cycle that repeats. It is useful for the
organization and the development teams to get used to that cycle.

A project cycle in Crystal Clear has three parts:

      A chartering activity

      A series of two or more delivery cycles

      A completion ritual: the project wrap-up


Chartering

The chartering activity takes a few days to a few weeks. It consists of four steps:

1. Build the core of the team.

2. Perform the Exploratory 360° (which may result in canceling the project).

3. Shape and fine-tune the methodology conventions.

4. Build the initial project plan.


Note that having only one delivery cycle is a violation of Crystal Clear (for some
definition of the word "delivery"). A project large enough to need a methodology
description will benefit from multiple delivery cycles. I have seen projects that the
sponsor thought were small enough not to need multiple deliveries that did quite
poorly for the simple lack of feedback that comes at the end of a delivery. In the
rare other cases, the projects were so small as to be a case of "just do it and go
home." If it is not a matter of "just do it and go home," please arrange for at least
two delivery cycles. Check the book sections on frequent delivery and delivery cycle
to learn what constitutes an adequate delivery.


Chartering: Build the Team

A project of the type that will use Crystal Clear often starts with an executive
sponsor and a lead designer, and eventually a key user.

Normally, two to five other people are added to the project, with a various mix of
skills, experience, and ability. The more novices on the team, the harder it is for the
lead designer to both train and develop software. Therefore, if there are more than
four people involved, the team should include at least one other experienced and
competent developer to back up and offload the lead. There should be an
experienced and competent person for every two or three junior or novice people.


The Executive Sponsor

The executive sponsor is the person who ultimately cares that the project gets done.
This person provides the moneyor at least arranges for it to show upand provides
essential direction to the group. She highlights the priorities the group needs to be
aware of, and gets the project not only monetary support, but also logistical and
emotional support. Often, the executive sponsor is also the domain expert.

During the project, the executive sponsor needs to remind the development team of
its true goal and keep it appraised of any changes in business direction that affects
the project's direction. In return, the team needs to keep the executive sponsor
appraised of the project's progress (burn charts are excellent for this).

A hazard lies in wait for the project with a highly technical executive sponsor:
oversteering. It often happens, particularly for small projects, that the project's
executive sponsor was once a superb technical designer. This sort of person can't
resist spelling out for the design team just how they might implement the system,
not that they have to, of course. In some cases, this person is correct, but still gets
in the way of the team. The former top designer who is sponsoring a project will
have to accept that the team may not create quite as superb a design as she could,
and live with that.

One of the ways to keep the former top designer from interfering too much in the
design is to use properly written use cases for the system specifications (see Writing
Effective Use Cases (Cockburn 2001b)). Properly written use cases accurately
specify the desired system behavior without specifying the design.

I have to mention that sometimes the executive sponsor does, in fact, know what is
possible with the technology, or what is required, even if that appears difficult. In
these cases, the best situation is for the sponsor and design team to develop a form
of discussion that permits the sponsor to express what she knows without running
over the team. After all, one of the primary contributions of the executive sponsor is
team motivation.


The Lead Designer

The person given the assignment of lead designer has a complicated job description,
which is not normally spelled out in advance. This person is often the best designer
on the team, a person who could, in principle, design the entire system. This person
is also supposed to train the younger members of the team, talk with the executive
sponsor and end users, build a project plan, and manage the development of the
project while also designing the most difficult part of the system. It is an impossible
job description, except that it is carried out successfully by many (overworked)
people around the world.
The best thing the executive sponsor can do for the lead designer is to provide a
second expert developer. This second expert developer should be the one who
handles the most difficult design tasks, because this second expert developer is not
so likely to get caught up in meetings about users, plans, status, interfaces, and so
on.

A key hazard surrounding the lead designer is that this person can get burned out
before the project is over. In one case, I met a lead designer who was already
working sixty hours a week at the start of the project. His own project plan had him
teaching Java to the new programmers, as well as doing the most difficult design
tasks, as well as . . . well, you get the idea. Although common, this situation is
unhealthy. By the time the project passes its halfway mark this person is likely to be
working ninety hours a week and sleeping under the desk for a few hours each
night. Sometime after that, a calamity of some sort is likely to hit the project, and
still more time is needed from this person.

It was for just this reason that Jens Coldewey devised the project management risk
reduction strategy I refer to as spare leader capacity.[4] That strategy roughly says,
"Ensure the technical lead has some spare capacity to assist in emergencies." We
know that emergency situations do arise on most projects; if the technical lead has
no spare capacity, she can't work through the emergency. Starting off a project at
sixty hours a week does not leave the technical leader with much spare capacity,
and at ninety hours a week, that spare capacity is all gone.

  [4] XP uses the term "sustainable pace." While that is sound, I find Jens's strategy to be usefully more specific.



  In the case of the lead designer I just mentioned, we worked together to
  identify every task that someone else could possibly do, even if he was best
  suited for the task himself. By taking these loads off him (he would still have
  to set up or monitor them), we were able to reduce his work load to about
  4550 hours a week at the start of the project, so that he might be able to keep
  within about 60 hours during the high-load period of the project.


The Expert User

The system will be better suited to what the users need if the developers have
access to an expert on system usage. The value the system brings to the
organization is very sensitive to the information the developers get about the usage
context. That means it is important that the team has easy access to proper usage
experts.

How much of that user's time does the team need?

It would be nice to have the expert user available to the team the whole time, of
course. That is rarely practical. Some methodologies suggest or require the user
expert be present 50 percent of the time. That would also be wonderful, of course,
but is usually also impractical.

My experience is that if the team can phone the expert user periodically during the
week to ask questions, and gets a few hours (even as little as two hours) of
dedicated time each week, they can work through their questions, get good
requirements information, show demos, and get usage and design feedback of a
quite adequate sort.

It may be that the expert user shows up each Tuesday afternoon for a ninety minute
meeting, and can be phoned half a dozen times each week. This is usually enough
to put the project into the safety zone. If the user cannot even commit to one hour
a week, then the project is not in the safety zone, but actually is in some danger
with respect to appropriateness of requirements and adequacy of user feedback.


The Rest of the Team

Crystal Clear only names the above three roles specifically. There will be other
people on the project. How they divide up the rest of the project roles is up to them.
In particular, someone, or several people, will have to capture the requirements in
use case or user story form. Also, someone will have to act as coordinator. Perhaps
the lead designer can off-load this onto someone else who has good
communications skill.


Chartering: Perform the Exploratory 360°

At an early point in the project, the teamincluding the executive sponsordoes a
once-around check of the key issues. This is the Exploratory 360° described earlier,
or an equivalent, such as RUP's "inception" phase (Kruchten 1999). In this check,
they make sure the project won't founder on

     The business value

     The requirements

     The domain model

     The technology to be used

     The project plan

     The team makeup

     The methodology or conventions to be used

Each of these is reviewed in a coarse-grained fashion, to detect whether the
intended team and projected methodology, using the intended technology around
the projected domain model, can deliver the intended business value with the
projected set of requirements according to the draft project plan. The exploratory
360° results in a set of adjustments to the project setup, or in the most drastic
case, a decision by the executive sponsor to cancel the project (better now than
later!).


Chartering: Shape the Methodology

Shaping the methodology can often be done in two days, and should not take longer
than a week for a Crystal Clear team. It may be done using the methodology
shaping technique, the RUP's development cases (Kruchten 1999) or similar.

Recall that a methodology is nothing more than the conventions the team agrees to
adopt. Since the set of conventions will be revisited twice per iteration or delivery
cycle, it would, in principle be possible to start from any methodology and simply
tune it over time to suit the team. There is probably not enough time on a typical
Crystal Clear project to follow that strategy. It will be fastest to start with the team's
best thoughtful list, so that the subsequent tunings won't have to be so drastic.

As explained at length in Agile Software Development, there is a fairly high cost in
using an overly heavy methodology: quite possibly that the team will fail to produce
software for the first release at all. For this reason, start with a lighter initial set of
conventions than you might suspect correct. With fewer rules, the team usually is
more likely to deliver working software, and from reconsidering the conventions in
the light of experience, they can add the missing conventions in the next reflection
workshop.


Chartering: Build the Initial Project Plan

There are various ways within the tolerance limits of Crystal Clear of constructing a
base project plan.

      My own favorite is to use the blitz planning technique described earlier.

      The most rigorous and careful method I know is DSDM's (Stapleton 2003). It
      involves a set of checks of the project objectives with the executive sponsor,
      followed by the construction of a release plan and a series of time-boxes, each
      one to three months long.

      Scrum's planning method fixes the time-boxes at one month long (Schwaber
      2002).

      In XP's planning game (Beck 1999, 2000), the team, including its "customer,"
      writes a set of story cards for the functional requirements and sorts those
      cards into three-week time-boxes[5] (iterations). The team discusses with the
      executive sponsor the appropriate frequency of release to real users, and then
      groups the iterations into release periods, often about three months long.

         [5] In practice, most XP teams seem to vary it anywhere from one to three weeks.
Each of these techniques is within the methodology tolerances of Crystal Clear. Each
provides an initial project plan, and is fast enough that it can be used on a regular
basis to track changes in the project's situation and make an updated project plan.
Choose one that fits you.


Reflection on Chartering

For the average project, the team is being assembled during the chartering period.
The people doing the chartering have to deal with a number of variables. The people
may or may not know each other, or may show up at some point in the middle of
the project, needing time to learn to communicate with each other.

If the project emerges from exploratory 360° with a positive result, the team has a
sense of where the project is headed, what problem it is tackling, the technology to
be used, the project plan, and its business value. This creates an early alignment of
goals and actions that strengthens the team.

The methodology shaping and initial project plan should take a couple of days. If the
results have to be communicated to a wider audience, it may take a few more days
to write up.

All of the chartering should take a few days to a week to complete, unless the
project involves a new technology that is difficult to evaluate.

How important is the order of the steps I outlined earlier? I wrote them in the order
that makes sense to me, but I can't see that the order is critical. Choose the order
that makes sense to you.

The outcomes of the chartering activity are

     A go or no-go vote on the project

     A group of people with a draft charter and an idea of what they are doing
THE DELIVERY CYCLE
The delivery cycle has three or four parts:

     A recalibration of the release plan

     A series of one or more iterations, each resulting in integrated, tested code

     Delivery to real users

     A completion ritual, including reflection on both the product being created and
     the conventions being used


Recalibrating the Release Plan

On the first delivery cycle, it should, of course, not be necessary to recalibrate the
plan just created. After the first delivery, however, the team members will find
themselves with new and valuable information to feed into the project plan. They
will have learned both how fast they really work and how mistaken their initial size
estimates were. Furthermore, they and their users will have learned more about
what is really needed in the system.

They have a choice: they can stick with the original set of requirements and merely
update the plan, or they can revisit both the requirements and the plan. Crystal
Clear does not mandate either strategythat decision is up to the project sponsor.
They would, however, be remiss in their professional duty if they didn't update their
work estimates and reexamine possible strategies going forward.

I am obliged to repeat here the note from the blitz planning technique. There is an
interpretation of agile development that the executive sponsor is at the mercy of the
developers in constructing the project plan. This interpretation is faulty. What is true
is that there is a careful allocation of responsibilities in the planning activity. The
executive sponsor controls the project priorities, the development team controls the
estimate of how long each task will take, and they jointly share responsibility for
coming up with a plan to deliver the best results fitting the executive sponsor's
priorities with the time and people available. If the executive sponsor still feels that
the project is taking too long, she has exactly three options:

     Replace the team.

     Adjust the project's scope or time boundaries.

     Come up with a more creative strategy to get the work done with the time and
     people available.
My experience is that a combination of the last two works well to deliver maximum
business value for resources expended.


Iterations

Iteration cycles are described in the next section.


Delivery to Real Users

As described in Frequent Delivery, delivery in Crystal Clear means "to a real user."
In differing circumstances, that might mean full deployment with training classes, or
it many be to only one person, a friendly user willing to give the budding system a
walk through, either out of curiosity or just as a courtesy to the team.

The cost of deployment in the former case is quite expensive, and so "delivery"
probably cannot be done every month or even two, but may have to be done
quarterly. The second case is inexpensive. My experience is that you can usually find
a friendly user if you try; the value obtained from this person is very high.

Many of my colleagues, used to deploying over the Web or to friendly, internal users
not needing training materials, assail me regularly for suggesting that a team can
go for three months before deployment. There are three reasons that I accept
delivery in Crystal Clear to be as long as, but not longer than, three months:

     People seem to be able to retain their work focus and detailed memory for
     about three months, but not noticeably longer. In all my project interviews, I
     found a few teams able to make quarterly delivery cycles work reliably, but
     only one at four months, and none longer than that.

     The cost of delivering a system ready for full-scale use, complete with user
     training, is much higher than delivering the same system to just one or a few
     friendly users. The time and money cost of testing the system, writing the
     manuals, and creating the training is sufficient that it is often impractical to do
     it more than quarterly.

     Quarterly delivery of value to the business is quite often sufficient for the
     executives (the contrasting view, of course, is that their business might itself
     become more agile if delivery could be done monthly).


Completion Ritual: Reflect on the Delivery

Pressure is typically quite intense toward the end of the delivery period.

Unwinding is part of a general human need for rhythm. I was surprised to hear
three XP masters talk about burnout after a year or two of successful XP practice.
They said that their work was operating at a constant pressure, day after day, week
after week, month after month. It was not that the pressure was high, but that it
was unrelenting. The same was reported by a pair of programmers using Crystal
Clear with two-week iterations. After a while, the monotony of work life was getting
to them. In other words, people need a chance to unwind and "shake it out," so
they can ramp up again for the next period of intensity.

Therefore, after delivering the software, unwind. Use the reflection workshop as part
of "shaking it out." Instead of holding a reflection workshop at the end of the last
iteration before delivery, save it up until just after the delivery, then reflect.

Include a celebration after a delivery. I have heard of people holding a party, going
for a walk in the mountains, going sailing as a group, going home early, or allocating
some days for people to work on a new technology, something other than the
system under development.

One manager arranged for a two-day off-site meeting after each of the first few
(quarterly) deliveries. They spent the first day on team building, socializing, and
reflecting. They spent the second day planning the next delivery cycle. With the
exception of "team building and socializing" (which alert readers will recognize as
essential activities in agile development), the same time was spent on project
activities as they would have been in the office. The difference was that both the
place and the pace were different, so that the team returned to their offices in a
refreshed state. After several deliveries, they decided they didn't need two days any
longer, and held the combined activity on-site within a single day. However, they still
got the completion ritual and change of pace they needed.

After a delivery, the team has two additional issues to reflect on:

     How did the deployment go? What different actions should be taken early in
     the delivery cycle to reduce the pain of deployment and training?

     What do the users think of the system? What are its strong points and weak
     points? Most importantly, can the team learn anything about what is really
     needed by the users, compared with what was originally requested?

Reflecting on the delivery process is the same as for any other reflection workshop.
The group asks: What do we like and want to keep the same? What would we like to
do differently? The only difference is that the changes affect either work habits
throughout the delivery cycle or activities that should take place early on, perhaps
in the first iteration.

To evaluate the system, the team may sit and watch the users, they may videotape
some users using it, they may hold customer focus groups, or they may even hire
an outside firm to evaluate the system in use. The point to be made is that it is the
product, not the process, that they review here.
THE ITERATION CYCLE
Iteration lengths and formats vary with different teams. I shall describe two possible
iteration cycles: a one-week iteration and a two-month iteration. Yours is likely to
fall in between these two.

An iteration has three parts:

       Iteration planning

       Daily and integration cycle activities

       Completion ritual (reflection workshop and celebration)

Within the iteration period, the team will find itself adding to its requirements set,
trying out user interface designs, extending the system's infrastructure, adding
functionality, showing the system to the user(s), adding tests, and adding to the
automation capabilities of their working environment.


The One-Week Iteration

In the case of a one-week iteration, the planning is likely to occur on Monday
morning and the reflection and celebration late on Friday afternoon.

The planning session on Monday morning is used to set the team's priorities for the
week. Since a week is not a long time, the team must divide their work into fairly
small pieces in order to guarantee that they can develop, test, and integrate the
pieces by Friday afternoon. The good news is that since a week is a short time, they
probably do not need to spend much time estimating and analyzing dependencies. I
would hope that the planning session for the week would not take more than about
an hour on Monday morning.

Each morning, noon, or late afternoon, the team is likely to have its daily check-in[6]
or stand-up meeting. Many teams report that meeting for five to ten minutes every
day increases the rate of flow of information within the team and improves the team
members' awareness of both political and technical situations that may become
relevant to them. The essence is to keep the meeting short (ten minutes) and to let
each team member know what is happening to the other team members.

  [6] Jim McCarthy has written a complete protocol for people to register their moods and intentions during the project (McCarthy 2002). The check-in
  protocol is the one used to announce readiness to work.



During the week, aside from the above meetings, the team simply operates in its
normal development activities. Their development episodes consist of nothing more
than picking up a work assignment, developing it and checking it in to the
configuration management system, plus performing an integration build and system
test, if that is the convention in use on the team. They will discuss and possibly
show their work to their executive sponsor and expert user according to the
rhythms they have set up.

The hazard for teams that use short (one- and two-week) iterations is that they
forget to ever bring in real users. If this is your situation, consider adding a super-
cycle that includes user viewings, or at least create an explicit User Viewing
schedule (see Chapter 5).


Completion Ritual for the One-Week Iteration

For an iteration only a week long, the iteration's closing ceremony is more about
providing emotional closure than anything else.

The burn-out syndrome described in the delivery cycle is most likely to show up
when the iteration cycle is very short. As Ron Jeffries wrote:

  Another thing that I like is the varying rhythm of an iteration. It starts with a
  plan, it builds up over a couple of weeks, then spins down. (If there's a frenzy
  at the end, we're not doing it right yet.) The iteration-free mode, it seems to
  me, would be just a relentless march, march, march. We did that on C3 for a
  while and it drove us mad, do you hear me, mad.Ron Jeffries, 9/24/03, xp-
  egroup

With longer iterations, the final integration and the longer reflection workshop and
long succeeding planning session provide a form of decompression. That is less the
case with weekly iterations, and so a series of computer games, ping-pong games, a
light discussion on any professional topic, a bike ride, or a visit to the pub could be
in order.

With a one-week-long iteration, do not expect too much from the post-iteration
workshops. After a few weeks, the team is unlikely to be able to think of much to
change, and they are likely to become very short. Once this happens, consider
holding the full reflection workshop once each month or two, and block out an entire
hour for it, so that people can reflect over what has happened over a longer period
of time and notice repeating patterns that need altering. (Note that this creates the
supercycle mentioned at the start of this chapter.)

Some teams capture suggestions during their daily stand-up meetings. This is
excellent, but it shouldn't replace the end-of-cycle reflection workshop. During the
daily stand-up a suggestion for improvement allows the team to respond
immediately. The end-of-cycle workshop gives people a special time to reflect on
what they find positive and negative about their working habits. It is for this reason
that a monthly or postdelivery reflection workshop may be an hour to half a day
long.


The Two-Month Iteration
The planning for a two-month iteration may take half a day or a full day, depending
on the technique used and the practice the team has had doing it. It is common to
plan the next iteration immediately following the post-iteration reflection workshop.
For those without an effective planning technique, I recommend starting with either
the blitz planning technique in this book or XPs planning game (Beck 2002; Cohn
2004).

During the iteration, the same daily activities occur as for the one week iteration:
daily check-in or stand-up, development episodes, integration-build-and-test, visits
with the user and the sponsor, and so on.

When the iteration is two months long, it is useful to hold a mid-iteration reflection
workshop. This is shorter and simpler than the end-of-iteration workshop. The
primary purpose of this reflection session is to discover whether anyone has
detected anything that will completely derail this iteration's success. If not, then
perhaps the people have found something they want to improve, or else the
meeting is just very short. If they have discovered a major danger, then obviously
they must work out what to do about it. The purpose of these workshops is to catch
mistakes while there is still time to correct them.


Completion Ritual for the Two-Month Iteration

The team might use an hour to half a day for the reflection workshop if they hold it
every four to six weeks. They should take the time to review every aspect of their
work, from their relation with their sponsor and users, to their communication
patterns, hostility and amicability, the way they gather requirements, their coding
conventions, the training they get or don't get, new techniques they might want to
try out, and so on.

After the first iteration or delivery cycle, very often teams tighten their standards,
get more training, streamline their work flow, increase testing, find a "friendly user,"
and set up configuration management conventions. At the end of subsequent cycles,
their changes tend to be much smaller, unless they are experimenting with a
radically new process.

Most people get caught up in their work and do not have the time or inclination to
reflect on their work habits. The point of this periodic reflection workshop is to catch
mistakes in time to repair them within the project and to give people a chance to
notice ineffective patterns.

In Japan, they call these sessions Kaizen workshops.[7] See an example output from
a (nonsoftware) Kaizen workshop in Chapter 5.

  [7] Strictly speaking, Kaizen is more frequent and typically has a specific form and output. However, even in Japan I have not found many groups doing
  Kaizen on their software process. Whether using my reflection workshop or the standard Kaizen form, the idea is to examine and improve the working
  conventions frequently.
THE INTEGRATION CYCLE
An integration cycle can run from half an hour to multiple days, depending on the
team's practices. Some teams have a stand-alone machine run a build-and-test
script continuously. Others integrate every few design episodes, staying in close
touch with each others' activities. Still others integrate once a day or three times a
week. Although shorter is generally better, Crystal Clear does not legislate the
length of time to use.

For more on integration, review the property, Technical Environment with
Automated Tests, Configuration Management and Frequent Integration.
THE WEEK AND THE DAY
Of the various cycles, only the daily and weekly cycles are calendar rhythms.

Many group activities occur on a weekly basis. These may include such things as a
Monday morning all-hands or department meeting, team leaders' report meeting, a
regular bring-your-own-lunch ("brown bag") technical discussion seminar, or a
Friday afternoon wine-and-cheese party or beer bust (depending on your culture!).

A work day also has its own rhythm. It is likely to start with a daily stand-up
meeting, and then consist of one or more design episodes, with a lunch break
thrown in at some point.

Some teams integrate their code multiple times a day, in which case the integration
cycle doesn't interact much with the daily and weekly cycles. Other teams do a
nightly, twice-weekly, or weekly build.
THE DEVELOPMENT EPISODE
Ward Cunningham coined the term episode to describe the basic unit of programmer
work in agile development.[8] During an episode, a person picks up some small
design assignment, programs it to completion (ideally with unit tests), and checks it
in to the configuration management system. This might take between fifteen
minutes and several days, depending on the programmer and the project
conventions. Keeping the episode less than one day in length generally works best.

  [8] http://c2.com/ppr/episodes.html



(Important note: To me, as to the many people in the world who work in the Crystal
style, designing and programming are such closely linked activities that they are not
worth prying apart. Thus, there is only the role "designer-programmer" in Crystal
Clear and Crystal Orange, not the two roles, designer and programmer.

Consequently, I write "to program" meaning "to design and program" or "to design"
meaning "to design and program." I write "programmer" meaning "designer-
programmer." Thus, in the last paragraph, the phrase "picks up a small design
assignment, programs it to completion," means picking up a small assignment that
requires designing and programming, then designing, programming, debugging and
testing it, to completion.

I need to clarify this because many readers naturally think of designing and
programming as actions of two separate job categories carried out by separate
people. That would be a serious misinterpretation of Crystal Clear.)
REFLECTION ABOUT THE PROCESS
Due to the history of our literature, most practitioners are used to seeing a linear
version of their process. The mental shift to accommodate a cyclic process is hard.
It is not that the practice of a cyclic process is hardyou probably already work in
cycles on your current project. However, I find that even the most experienced
project managers and methodologists can't explain cyclic processes, and particularly
their boundary interactions (such as the absence of replanning at the start of the
first delivery cycle and the absence of the reflection workshop at the end of the last
iteration in a delivery cycle). To be honest, I've been trying to explain them for over
ten years and only now feel I have a proper handle on the matter.

The difficulty is that some activities occur on daily and weekly rhythms that repeat
without creating any particular sense of "forward motion." These operations types of
activities include daily and weekly status meetings, checking in code, running unit
tests, going for lunch, convening around the coffee or soda machine. Operations
activities contrast with activities that show "forward progress," such as design
reviews, getting requirements sign-off, moving into test or alpha release phases.
People tend to catalog the progress activities in the process and neglect the
operations activities.

The nested-cycle view allows the discussion of both progress and operations
activities. Both are important to the life of the team member, both are part of the
"process."

Two cycles need a little more clarification: the iteration and the delivery.

In the recent literature of our field, "iteration" is used without much distinction. It
could refer to strictly internal iterations, as I describe it in this book, or for iteration-
with-delivery. Many people forget about fulfilling the delivery portion of their
iterative process. See the discussion under "We colocated and ran two-week
iterationswhy did we fail?" in Chapter 6.

In Crystal Clear, you are allowed to have just one iteration per delivery cycle, but if
you do this, you must have some intermediate viewings by real users. If you have
multiple iterations per delivery, some of those must include viewings by real users.
If you don't do this, you are building an effective software-producing team that
makes the wrong software very efficiently.
Chapter 5. Examined (The Work Products)
This chapter describes team roles and the work products, showing examples of each
work product. These particular work products are neither completely required nor
completely optional. They are the ones I can vouch for, both one at a time and
taken all together. Equivalent substitution is allowed, as is a fair amount of tailoring
and variation.

Although this is where the argument is most likely to occur, it is where the
argument is least likely to affect the project's outcome.

Just as describing a methodology through its process introduces problems of
interpretation, so does describing it with its work products. In a small methodology
such as Clear, the number and formality of intermediate work products is reduced
quite significantly. The team lives from their personal communication, notes on the
whiteboards or posters around the room, and demos or deliveries to the user base.

Nonetheless, a description of the work products is necessary. People just starting
with Crystal Clear need to see what counts as an "acceptable" set of work products.
Executives and sponsors need to see what they are entitled to ask for. Teachers
need a set of work products to have students practice on. Teams that are doing too
little in the way of planning and documentation need to see what is worth preparing
in even a light agile methodology. People working to understand a methodology will
want to examine the work products as part of the overall methodology package.

In this section, I describe roles and the work products. These work products should
be seen as the default set for a typical Crystal Clear project because they have
demonstrated their value to many projects. It is, of course, up to the project team
to add, subtract, or modify the list based on their situation.

Each item serves a communication purpose in the economic-cooperative game.
Sometimes the economically appropriate artifact is low-precision (not very detailed)
and large-scale (summarizing a large topic), examples being the project's mission
statement and the release plan. At other times, a medium- precision artifact is
needed, such as the actor-goal list, which outlines functional requirements at a
glance. Sometimes, high-precision (detailed) descriptions are needed, the final
code, user manual, and test cases being examples.

There are almost two dozen work products, depending on how you count them.
People coming from a traditional project background may be shocked by how few
there are; dyed-in-the-wool agile developers are shocked by how many there are
(they are shocked because unless they are doing XP, they just haven't counted how
many similar work products get produced on their current projects). The work
products here are light and distributed across the roles, so that the team should not
find them burdensome in practice. As an exercise, I suggest counting the total
number of work products generated on your current project. My experience is that
the number is seldom less than sixty. Compare them to the ones listed here.

The question arises over work products more than over any other aspect of a
methodology: "Do we have to do all of these?" The answer is difficult to give, as it
lies somewhere between the answer I was able to give for Properties ("For Crystal
Clear, absolutely the first three, and as much of the next four as possible.") and the
one I was able to give for Techniques ("Completely at the discretion of the team;
here are an interesting and useful starter set to consider.").

If you skip too many of these work products, you lose alignment and visibility. Your
direction and support can suffer accordingly. On the other hand, it would be just silly
for me to insist you do all of them as giventhe specific work products needed by
teams varies according to changing techniques, technologies, communication habits,
and even fashions.

I have been asked to name the "core" work products, as I was able to name the
"core" properties, but this is not possible. If I was going to choose one work product
to drop, it would be the project map (however useful it might be). If I was going to
choose another, it would be the viewing schedule (that could be done verbally and
on the fly). If I had to drop another couple, I might suggest merging the coarse-
grained and fine-grained iteration plan and status and dropping the fine-grained
iteration plan. It could happen that another person would drop them in another
order, or I might drop them in a different order on a different project.

Misalignment within the team and miscommunication with the outside world grow
with each omission. The risks accumulate, slowly at first, until the project is not in
the safety zone, and it is never clear when it moved from being safe to being
unsafe.

It is very easy to overburden a project with work that is useful individually, but
which, when taken all together, slows the group to the point of losing more safety
than it adds. This set of work products consists of items I can defend individually
and all together. Even if your team does every single one of them, it should not be
overburdensome. You may still be able to find a way to substitute for or omit some
of them. Discuss it in your methodology-shaping workshop, and discuss it again in
your monthly or quarterly reflection workshops. That's what those are for.

In the pages that follow, I describe each work product, indicating which role is
ultimately responsible for it. I include several examples of each work product to
show variations in style and format different teams have adopted. Where possible, I
show informal and formal renderings, graphical and textual. Seeing this range, you
can choose a form that works for you and the external groups you need to keep
informed.
THE ROLES AND THEIR WORK PRODUCTS
The sponsor is responsible for producing just one item:

  the Mission Statement with Trade-off Priorities.

The team as a group is responsible for producing two things:

  the Team Structure and Conventions, and

  the Reflection Workshop Results.

The coordinator, with the help of the team, is responsible for producing

  the Project Map,

  the Release Plan,

  the Project Status,

  the Risk List,

  the Iteration Plan and Status, and

  the Viewing Schedule.

The business expert and expert user together are responsible for producing

  the Actor-Goal List,

  the Use Cases and Requirements File, and

  the User Role Model.

The lead designer is responsible for producing the

  the Architecture Description.

The designer-programmers (including the lead designer) are responsible for

  the Screen Drafts,

  the Common Domain Model,

  the Design Sketches and Notes,
  the Source Code,

  the Migration Code,

  the Tests, and

  the Packaged System.

The tester (whoever is occupying that role at the moment) is responsible for
producing

  the Bug Reports at that time.

The writer is responsible for producing

  the User Help Text.
ROLES: SPONSOR, EXPERT USER, LEAD DESIGNER,
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER, BUSINESS EXPERT,
COORDINATOR, TESTER, WRITER
There are eight named roles for Crystal Clear, four of which probably have to be
distinct people. The other four can be additional roles assigned to people on the
project. The first four people are

     Executive sponsor

     Expert user

     Lead designer

     Designer-programmer


Executive Sponsor

This is the person who is either allocating or defending the allocation of the money
for the project. The executive sponsor is supposed to keep the long-term view in
mind, balancing the short-term priorities with those of subsequent releases and
subsequent teams evolving or maintaining the system. This is the person who will
create outside visibility for the project and provide the team with crucial business-
level decisions. If there is a question of balancing the money being spent for the
value being delivered, it is up to the executive sponsor to make the decision of when
and whether to continue or stop, and if continuing, how to trim the remaining
system functions to recover the business value. Part of the methodology involves
giving the executive sponsor good information to make those decisions.

Sometimes it is the user community who is actually paying for, or sponsoring, the
project, and they, as a department, work through an executive, who directs the
development team. It is easy in this situation for the executive sponsor role to get
awkwardly split, where the executive does not have the same long-term interests,
priorities, or vision as the user community. There is nothing that a methodology like
Crystal Clear can do to remove the potential conflict here. You, as a combined group
of people, have to recognize the hazards of this situation and work extra hard on
communication to keep priorities and goals aligned and visibility and amicability
high.


Expert User

This is the person who is supposed to be familiar with the operational procedures
and the system in use (if there already is one), knowing which are frequentlyand
infrequentlyused modes of operation, what short-cuts are needed, and what
information needs to be visible together on the screen at the same time. This is a
different knowledge base than the business expert is expected to have. The person
holding the role of business expert is expected to know the business rules needed
within the system, what business policies are stable versus which are likely to
change. The business expert is not expected to have intimate familiarity with the
minute-to-minute activities of the user population, whereas the expert user is.


Lead Designer

This is the lead technical person, the person supposed to have experience with
software development, able to do the major system design, tell when the project
team is on-track or off-track, and if off-track, how to get back onto track. In terms
of levels of competency, the lead designer is expected to be a level-3 designer.[1]

  [1] Remember from Chapter 1, level 1 skill is the "following procedures" stage of learning, level 2 is "breaking away from specific procedures," and level 3 is
  "fluency" or mixing and inventing on the fly.



There are arguments about whether agile development requires top-notch
programmers to succeed. I have never had the luxury of only using top
programmers, nor were the teams I interviewed made up of them. They were made
up of the usual mix of people one finds in a company. It is most important though
that at least one person on the team was competent and experienced, that is, level
3.

The ratio of level-3 people to level-1 people is a factor that I consider significant
enough that I offer it to researchers to examine as a primary correlation factor to
project success. My experience is (and I suspect the research will show) that this
applies to both small and large projects, both low- and high-ceremony projects.
High-ceremony projects need much more boilerplate work done, and so can live
with a higher mix of less talented people to the talented ones. Barry Boehm and
Rich Turner (2003) capture this difference on their radial diagram (Balancing Agility
and Discipline, p. 56), where one of the axes is the ratio of level-3 to level-1 people.

Since there are only three to eight people on a Crystal Clear project, at least one of
them has to be competent and experienced, that is, level 3. Usually, there are a
couple of trainees or junior people on the project. For the purpose of project safety,
then, I designate the lead designer role separately from the other roles.

The lead designer is likely to have major influence in the methodology-shaping
workshop. Very often, the lead designer is the only experienced designer on the
team. If the entire team is experienced, then of course the methodology-shaping
workshop can work in a peer-to-peer fashion.

I use the word "designer" for this role to shorten the role name from the overly long
"lead designer-programmer." The lead designer is expected to both design and
program, just as are the other designer-programmers.

Usually, but not always, the lead designer is the most experienced person on the
team and also handles the most difficult programming assignment. Although this is
common, it actually presents a risk for the project. The lead designer tends to get
overloaded, having the role as coordinator as well as architect, mentor, and most
experienced programmer. Anything that can be done to offload the lead designer is
likely to improve the risk profile of the project. The obvious choice is to have
someone else play part or all of the coordinator role.


Designer-Programmer

I merge the words "designer" and "programmer" in the designer-programmer role to
highlight that each person both designs and programs. Designing without
programming is full of flaws due to lack of feedback (in projects of all sizes). It very
particularly has no place on a project of the Crystal Clear type. Programming by its
very nature involves designing. Neither designer nor programmer stands alone as a
role name, hence designer-programmer.


The Other Roles

The coordinator is probably a partial occupation for someone on the team; projects
of only four to eight people seldom have a dedicated project manager. There may be
a person managing several projects, and playing the coordinator role for each of
them. Alternatively, the executive sponsor or lead designer may get this role, or
even other people may take turns holding this position.

The person occupying the coordinator role must, at the minimum, take notes at the
project planning and status sessions, as well as comb the information for posting
and presenting. The coordinator is responsible for giving the project sponsors
visibility into the structure and status of the project. With luck, the coordinator also
is someone with a good human touch, who can facilitate discussions and reduce
strife.

The Business Expert is the expert on how the business runs, what strategies or
policies are fixed, what is likely to vary soon, often, or seldom. This person will
answer all the varied questions the developers will have about the heart of the
system. It is different information than the expert user typically provides, although
in some cases it may happen that the expert user is also the business expert. In
various situations, I have seen the executive sponsor, the lead designer, or the
expert user act as the business expert. Sometimes an external person is brought in
for that expertise.

Tester and writer are likely to be rotating or temporary assignments. I give these
separate role names, but in many Crystal Clear projects there are only the four to
eight people, all programmers, sitting in the room. In this case they obviously have
to take turns occupying these roles. Some teams may get use of a writer for periods
of time, or have a dedicated tester working and even sitting with them.
A NOTE ABOUT THE PROJECT SAMPLES
In the following, I draw from a set of projects, some but not all of which were
Crystal Clear projects.

The PRTS project was the project to build a system to track all purchase requests
issued by employees of the Central Bank of Norway, whether they were fulfilled from
the internal warehouse or external vendors. This project, for its short life, consisted
of four people who worked on it exactly one day each week. It met the Osmotic
Communication requirement because nobody worked on it at all for four days, and
then we worked together on the fifth day each week.

I was the coordinator for this project. We proceeded from mission statement,
through blitz planning and through the exploratory 360°. During the exploratory
360°, the proposed project failed both the technology spike and the business
evaluation tests. The programmers wanted to keep going on it, but the executive
sponsor decided to purchase a package for the system in order to free up the
programmers for work more important to the business. Not only was this the correct
business decision,[2] but the programmers found their next project much more
exciting, since it involved both critical business value and new technology.

  [2] Niel Nickolaisen (2004) has written a simple business evaluation procedure to decide which projects to develop in-house and which to outsource, see
  http://agiledevelopmentconference.com/files/nickolaisen.ppt.



Consequently there are work products for PRTS up through that point.


The NICS-NBO project

Due to a bank failure in the early 1990s, all Norwegian banks have to keep a
"checking account" with the Central Bank, and all bank-to-bank transactions must
be funneled through these checking accounts. The bank union, representatives from
key banks, and the manager of the banking division of the Central Bank comprised
the steering committee for a series of projects. The NBO project here was the third
in the series. I was coordinator for this project.

At the beginning it was staffed with the same three programmers who had done the
first two projects. It looked like an easy candidate for Crystal Clear, even though the
technology was mainframe with COBOL, assembler, CICS, and LU6.2. Over time, we
lost the lead designer (paternity leave), as well as half of the second senior person
(Y2K projects), and were left only with the junior developer and a new hire. The
staff then grew in number and lost osmotic communication. At this point, the project
was out of Crystal Clear range. The work product sample I am using here is the
coarse-grained project-plan and the single-sheet combination of status and risk list
that we used to report to the steering committee each month.


The BSA project
This was a project performed as part of a senior year course at Weber State
University. The small team met once a week outside class and communicated by
phone and e-mail otherwise. They used database technology for the project, so the
domain model consists of a database schema. I would like to thank Dr. Christopher
Jones and this team, Eric Schultz, Keith Deppe, Tony Hess, and Bethany Stimpson
for this project.


Project Winifred

Project Winifred is the fifty-person, $15 million, eighteen-month fixed-price, fixed-
time project I described at length in Surviving Object-Oriented Projects, and for
which we constructed the original Crystal Orange. I use the project map and coarse-
grained delivery plan from that project, because it seems interesting to me that our
eighteen-month project had a coarse-grained plan consisting of about eight bubbles
(backed by about 240 two-paragraph use cases).


The CamCal Camera Calibration prototype

This was a trial run of Crystal Clear in Thales, an ISO 9001 certified organization.
This project involved four people for four months and fit the Crystal Clear guidelines.
They were kind enough to let me include their experience report and auditor
recommendations in this book (see Chapter 8).

Additional projects are represented in the work product samples. These, however,
are sample descriptions of the sorts of projects used.
SPONSOR: MISSION STATEMENT WITH TRADE-OFF
PRIORITIES
The mission statement is a brief description, typically a paragraph to a page, of
what is to be built, its purpose in a larger context, and the project's priorities in
sequence, from the most critical to those that can be sacrificed.

It is produced by the sponsor, before the project starts or during project chartering.
It is reviewed by the business expert and lead designer, and referenced by everyone
on the team. Any major change in the mission statement triggers a team meeting,
so that everyone on the team understands the new mission.

A good mission statement retains its clarity and relevance over time, keeping the
work efforts focused on the most important features of the system.

Because people can generally only protect one and possibly two project priorities, it
has no more than two top priority items. The priorities might be chosen from hitting
a particular delivery date, cost, ease of use, ease of learning, speed in use,
correctness, performance, ease of maintenance, design flexibility, legal liability
protection (you may come up with other choices for your project). The mission
statement makes clear to the team what can be sacrificed if necessary to preserve
the top priorities. I note here that it is unlikely to succeed at both quick delivery and
correctness as the top two priorities. Those are two that need to be traded against
each other.


Figure 5-1. CamCal mission statement. (Courtesy of Stephen Sykes
                            at Thales)
                   Figure 5-2. BSA mission statement.




I provide three examples here, from the Camera Calibration project, the Boy Scouts
tracking program, and the PRTS project, respectively. See also Agile Project
Management (Highsmith 2004) for examples.


                   Figure 5-3. PRTS mission statement.
TEAM: TEAM STRUCTURE AND CONVENTIONS
Team structure is an allocation of people to roles. Team conventions are a collection
of rules, practices, and conventions the team agrees to adopt.

Team conventions shift constantly. This is appropriate, because the situation in
which the team finds itself is constantly changing. The team should not only be
conscious about these changes, but should deliberately search for the optimal set of
conventions for their project.

The published part of Crystal Clear contains a large number of agreements and
conventions for the team to adopt. Being written for many projects, it cannot be
complete. The team needs to settle additional conventions, at least the following:

     Allocation of people to roles

     Programming conventions such as naming, formatting, commenting

     Code ownership conventions

     Design and code-reviewing conventions, whether code reviews or pair
     programming or none

     Iteration length and forms of reporting status, frequency of user viewing

     Configuration management conventions

Depending on the experience of the team, the conventions may be built through an
open methodology-shaping workshop, or drafted initially by the lead designer and
allowed to evolve by suggestion and consensus of the entire team in reflection
workshops ("consensus" means each person is willing to accept and defend it, even
if it is not that person's personal preference). Some conventions require consensus
of the sponsor as well.

The conventions should be consciously reviewed at the post-iteration reflection
workshop, or at least every three months. Reread the Iteration Cycle in Chapter 4 to
review this. At any time, of course, someone on the team may discover that
something is really not working, and may request a change to the way the team is
working.

Team conventions are often spoken rather than written. Some may get written on
the information radiators. Coding conventions are often shown via sample code.

I categorize a methodology as "successful" if

  1. The software gets delivered.

  2. The team is content to work the same way again.
This may seem to be a very low threshold for success, but recent project reports
show it to be surprisingly difficult.

If your methodology fails on either count, change it using the methodology-shaping
workshop technique.

The team structure in Crystal Clear should be quite straightforward to establish.
Four roles are crucial: executive sponsor, lead designer, designer-programmers, and
expert user. The other roles, business expert, coordinator, testers, and writers can
be combined roles, assigned either to additional people or shared by people having
other roles. Quite often, the executive sponsor, lead designer, or expert user is the
business expert.

Figure 5-4 is an example of role assignment.


                     Figure 5-4. BSA role assignments.




A simple example of a convention adopted by a testing department team follows.
They were trying to move from manual to automated testing, but ran into the
problem that they spent most of their time fighting fires (using manual tests), and
had trouble getting themselves to sit down and write automated tests. They
therefore established for themselves the convention: "No manual testing before 3
P.M."

This simple rule gave them the focus (both priority and time) they needed to get
over the initial hurdles and build a starter set of automated regression tests.

Figure 5-5 is an excerpt of some team conventions we created for a fifty-person
company (fifty people puts it in the Crystal Orange category). There were several
dozen conventions, which we divided into five categories: Regular Heartbeat with


     Figure 5-5. Project conventions. (Courtesy of eBucks.com)
Learning, Basic Process, Maximum Progress, Minimum Distractions, Maximally
Defect Free, and A Community Aligned in Conversation. I list the entire set of
conventions in Agile Software Development. For space reasons, I include in Figure
5-5 only the third section as illustrative.
TEAM: REFLECTION WORKSHOP RESULTS
The reflection workshop results is an information radiator that shows what the team
has concluded after its reflection workshop. It is often a flip chart containing "Things
we should keep," "Things to try," and "Ongoing problems" (see Reflection Workshop
in Chapter 3). The chart is hung in a highly visible place so the team can notice
what conventions and practices are the themes of the iteration.

The output is produced by the entire team during or at the conclusion of the
reflection workshop. Feedback from teams indicates that it is not a good idea to give
one person the job of "cleaning up" the flip chart used in the workshop: For the first
part, that person usually changes the words on the chart, so it is no longer the
words that received the team's approval. For the second part, the "cleaned up"
version simply looks different than the people recall, and so they don't identify with
it as well. Generally speaking, it doesn't much matter if the chart is a bit messy as
long as it is readable. If you are going to clean it up, do it as part of the workshop.

A good reflection workshop results chart is big, visibly placed, and shows the team
what they should pay special attention to in the coming weeks. Thus, it is better to
use the phrase "Try This" (which states concretely what everyone should try) as
opposed to "Needs Improvement" (which reminds everyone of what is bad without
suggesting a remedy). Figures 5-6 and 5-7 are examples.


    Figure 5-6. Reflection workshop output. (Courtesy of Tomax)
Figure 5-7. Kaizen output chart from Japan. (Courtesy of Satoshi
                     Basaki, Schlumberger)
COORDINATOR: PROJECT MAP, RELEASE PLAN, PROJECT
STATUS, ITERATION PLAN AND STATUS, VIEWING
SCHEDULE, RISK LIST
The sponsor, the development team, and the users all need to be able to plan their
activities around when the system functions are supposed to become visible and
available. The team needs to know the order in which to create them and the target
dates, and the users need to know when they must allocate time to evaluate them
or start using them.

Crystal Clear projects operate with two distinct time horizons: long term and short
term. The long-term horizon typically refers to anything over three months,
although it can be used for anything longer than a single iteration. Planning and
tracking for the long-term horizon is coarse grained. This allows the team to provide
the executives with the resource and expense estimates needed for overall
enterprise planning, while taking into account that the team won't know what the
actual costs will be until they get further along.

The short-term horizon typically refers to a single iteration. Fine-grained planning
and tracking is used for the short-term horizon. This is so everyone can see the
team's progress and detect problems quickly. The short-term plan and status are
usually captured on information radiators in the team room.

The following work products are produced at different times and maintained in
different ways:

     Project map

     Risk list

     Viewing and release schedule (the coarse-grained plan)

     Project status (coarse-grained)

     Iteration plan (the fine-grained plan)

     Iteration status (fine-grained)

As mentioned earlier, there may be a dedicated person acting as coordinator on the
project, but more often it is the sponsor or lead designer who takes that role. Some
groups find it helpful to have someone else take on the coordinator's role to reduce
the load on the typically overburdened lead designer.
COORDINATOR: PROJECT MAP
The project map is a dependency diagram identifying the major work to be done
and which ones depend on others (see the blitz planning technique). Its purpose is
to show the structure of the problem and the sequence of attack. It contains no
dates. That is partly because it is often drawn up before the team members and
their capabilities are known, but more generally, to permit different staffing and
timing strategies to be considered. It is intended to be viewed at one time, either on
a conference room table or on a wall, using index cards as task markers. This limits
the number of items that get put onto the map.

The project map is produced by the business expert, lead designer, and the sponsor
in the coordinator role. It is approved by the sponsor, referenced by everyone on the
project, and updated by the coordinator. It is produced very early in the project,
before the release coarse-grained project plan. It is likely that the project map
morphs into the project plan as the dates are added, and changes are made directly
into the project plan as the project shape changes.

A good project map answers at a glance: "In what order are we delivering what?
What do we build next? What are the dependencies between our releases?"

Some project teams discard the project map as soon as the release plan is
produced, others find it useful to retain.

Figure 5-8 is an example.


                      Figure 5-8. Sample project map.
COORDINATOR: RELEASE PLAN
The Release Plan is an association of dates with major milestones, which are usually
iteration ends and deliveries. The project map may become the release plan as
dates are added. The release plan may itself directly become the Project Status (the
NICS-NBO release plan, below, evolved into that project's project status).

Coming up with dates requires everyone's input. Usually, the first release plan is
produced by the coordinator and lead designer. The business expert and sponsor
check the priorities of the plan. The plan is rebuilt at the start of every delivery
cycle, possibly even at each iteration (recall, there are multiple deliveries per
project, and one or more iterations per delivery cycle). Once the team is familiar
with the project assignment, the entire team can contribute to updating the project
plan.

Figures 5-9 to 5-12 are examples from real projects, in graphical and text form.
Comment on the formats used: Many team leaders getting started with Crystal
Clear and other agile development approaches feel obliged to put their plan onto a
Gantt chart. Gantt charts quickly become out of date, are tedious to update, and are
hard to read. Project leads and sponsors who have moved from Gantt charts to
dependency diagrams and lists report that the latter are easier to read and
maintain.


   Figure 5-9. Sample release plan derived from the project map.




          Figure 5-10. Release plan from PRTS project.
Release 1, Jan. 30: Single function. Buyer can enter a request that was
completed and signed on paper, and generate POs that can be printed.
Receiver can mark delivery against PO and request. Supports split and
partial deliveries.


Release 2, April 30: First reports (searches, collects, and prints selected
reports), and first security functions. Allows requestor to create request,
collects approval from approver, notifies buyer.


Release 3, June 30: Full function, with full database functions.


Actor                    Goal                               Release


Requestor                Initiate a request                    1


                         Change a request                      1


Buyer                    Complete request for                  1
                         ordering


                         Initiate PO with vendor               1


Receiver                 Register delivery                     1


Any                      Check on requests                     1


Authorizer               Change authorizations                 2


Approver                 Complete request for                  2
                         submission


Buyer                    Change vendor contacts                3


Authorizer               Validate approver's                   3
                         signature


Requestor                Cancel a request                      4
                          Mark request delivered             4


                          Refuse delivered goods             4


Buyer                     Alert of nondelivery               4




  Figure 5-11. Release plan using Norges Bank's milestone
                           charts.


     Milestone                                              Planned


I1   A single, simple transaction makes a round trip        Feb 1
     between the computers.


I2   Simple purchase transaction successfully posted from   Mar 31
     GUI through database.


I3   Reports of active requests and work flow through       Jun 30
     buyer.


I4   All work flow sampled. All reports run.                Sep 1


I5   All functionality works                                Sep 30


I6   User acceptance                                        Oct 10


I7   Deployment                                             Oct 20




 Figure 5-12. Release plan using "iceberg list." (Courtesy of
                  Jeff Patton and Tomax)
                                                             Release
Module Feature Name                                  Value
                                                             #


1.1   Configuration generates order line item        M       1
      comments


1.2   Configurator UI Rework: Verbose wizard style H         1


2.1   PO generated correctly for configuration       H       1


2.2   Create/Confirm vendor items exist for SKUs     H       1


3.1   Advanced order form shows more details         M       1


3.2   Order fulfilled at PO cost                     H       1


3.3   Repeat orders work with blind configurations   M       1


3.4   Configuration comments are viewable, not       L       1
      editable


4.1   Base hierarchy change                          H       1


4.2   Style can locate price charts based on color   H       1
      selection


4.3   Assign specific color group colors to price    H       1
      charts


1.3   Configuration generates customer specific      H       2
      pricing


1.4   Allow adding a configuration and continue      L       2


2.3   PO generation is automatic                     L       2


3.5   Order shows sq. footage & running length       L       2
                                                                Release
Module Feature Name                                   Value
                                                                #


3.6     Vendor orderable items show additional detail L         2


3.7     Printed window treatments show disclaimers    M         2


3.8     Allow order line item copying                 H         2


4.1     Associate style with Retail.net DCL           L         2


4.11    Grid validation                               L         2


4.6     Assign customer specific selling discounts    H         2




Figure 5-13 is adapted from a reengineering project to replace a workflow system.
Each name is the name of a workflow station. They didn't use a burn-down chart for
their project plan. I include it as an example of how one might do so.


         Figure 5-13. Release plan using a burn-down chart.
COORDINATOR: PROJECT STATUS
The Project Status is a listing of the state of the project with respect to the release
plan. It is often just that with the status marked. The status information might
include the currently predicted due date, or the originally scheduled completion
date, foreseen completion date, and foreseen risks. On one project, we were asked
to also compare original and projected cost figures on this chart. The project status
should generally take less than half a page; you can use the other half of the page
for the risk list, making a complete project report on a single sheet of paper.

The project status is maintained by the coordinator, in conversation with the
development team. It is used by the sponsor and the manager of the user
community to plan their separate efforts. It is updated every few weeks or every
month.

A good project status is brief, easy to read, and shows the information the readers
need in order to assess the cost, date, and risk trajectory of the project.

Figures 5-14 to 5-17 show some examples. Comments on the strategy and formats
used: People are increasingly using simple tables to report status. The second
example shows one of the differences in agile development techniques: something
of business significance gets delivered approximately every week, with a full cycle
every month. By completing a full conversion in the first month, the team has a
chance to learn about what is involved and where they are running into problems,
and still have plenty of time to learn how to do better in subsequent cycles.



Figure 5-14. The project plan of Figure 5-11 became a status
                            chart.


    Milestone              Planned         Delivered Notes


I 1 A single, simple       Feb 1           Feb 3       Complete
    transaction makes a
    round trip
    betweenthe
    computers.


I 2 Simple purchase        Mar 31                      Underway. Uncertainty
    transaction                                        over the DCOM
    successfully posted                                components, still in
    from GUI through                                   learning curve.
    database.                                          Experiments
                                                       underway.
   Milestone               Planned        Delivered Notes


I 3 Reports of active    Jun 30                          Started. Initial design
    requests & work-flow                                 work.
    through Buyer.


I 4 All work flow          Sep 1                         not started
    sampled. All reports
    run.


I 5 All functionality works Sep 30                       not started


I 6 User acceptance        Oct 10                        not started


I 7 Deployment             Oct 30                        not started




   Figure 5-17. Chart showing status changes over a two-month
  period. (Courtesy of Marty Lacy and Omar Alam, Schlumberger)

                                [View full size image]
Figure 5-16. Status chart using a burn-down chart.
Figure 5-15 is a status sheet for a project involving conversion of 200 applications
and their databases. In preparing this example for publication, I just numbered the
systems, where the company had system names. The dates in parentheses are the
predicted completion dates; the bold dates without parentheses are the actual
completion dates.



    Figure 5-15. Status chart for a proposed project to convert
                          200 databases.


           New Tables      Migration       Old Tables       Old Tables
System
           Operating       Code Works      Converted        Removed


1          (Feb 1) Feb 3   (Feb 7) Feb 10 (Feb 14) Feb      (Mar 1) Mar 1
                                          18


2          (Mar 1) Mar 1 (Mar 7)           (Mar 14)         (Apr 1)


3          (Apr 1)         (Apr 7)         (Apr 14)         (May 1)


4          (May 1)         (May 7)         (May 14)         (June 1)


5          (June 1)        (June 7)        (June 14)        (July 1)
          New Tables      Migration      Old Tables       Old Tables
System
          Operating       Code Works     Converted        Removed


(etc.)




Figure 5-17 is a chart showing changing status over a two-month period. White
means not started, medium-gray (green in the original) means completed.
COORDINATOR: RISK LIST
The risk list consists of the top risks facing the project, how significant and likely
each is, the damage it can cause, and what prevention or response is possible. I like
to track whether they have grown or shrunk recently.

The risk list is produced and maintained by the coordinator in conversation with the
team, updated weekly or monthly. It is used in discussions with the sponsor.

Creating the risk list is trivial. The hard part is deciding what to do in case the risk
materializes. As with the mission statement, the brevity of the work product belies
the thought put into constructing it. There is a very satisfying feeling from watching
a risk materialize and realizing that one has a response ready for it.

The risk list can live on an information radiator or in a spreadsheet.

Figure 5-18 is styled after the NICS-NBO project. This plus the project status
resulted in a one-page project summary sheet examined at every steering
committee meeting.



    Figure 5-18. Risk list using format from Norges Bank project.


                        Possible                                          Milestones
Priority Risk                        Likelihood Response       Change
                        Result                                            Affected


1        Very high    Unexpected Quite high Test        As before 25
         performance failures in            performance
         demands in a system                early
         new,         operation
         untested
         technology


2        User          Delays in     Medium      Show users As before 5
         community delivery                      as soon as
         changes their                           possible
         idea of
         requirements
         late on
                     Possible                                    Milestones
Priority Risk                   Likelihood Response     Change
                     Result                                      Affected


3       Need to test Misunder- Low         Clear test   Less     26
        on factory    standings,           routines
        floor as well delays in
        as in         delivery
        development


4       Year 2000     Bad data in Medium   Special Y2K Less      6
        compatibility system               test
                      causes
                      faulty
                      operation


5       Data         Delay in   Medium     Create       As before 67
        conversion   delivery              conversion
        problems                           strategy
COORDINATOR: ITERATION PLAN                           ITERATION STATUS
The fine-grained iteration plan lists what is being developed in this iteration. Each
item may be something that could take from a day to two weeks to develop,
depending on how long the iteration is. The iteration plan may show dependencies
between work items (if, for example, it was produced by blitz planning), it may treat
all work items as being independent (if, for example, it was produced by XP's
planning game or is simply a list of product features), or it could be a marking of
selected sentences in the use cases.

The iteration plan is produced by the coordinator working with the development
team. It is kept up to date by the coordinator in the same way, usually becoming
the iteration status directly.

A good iteration plan lists all the work items the team has to complete so that they
can be checked off when completed, so that the sponsor and the developers can see
all significant work items. The granularity varies with the iteration length and the
team's knowledge of their assignment.

Figure 5-19 is an iteration plan, courtesy of Thoughtworks Corporation. In this case,
one XP user story is written on each flip chart. Tasks for each story are written on
sticky notes and attached to the flip chart (the tasks below the flip charts have been
taken out of scope for the iteration).


 Figure 5-19. Iteration plan becomes iteration status. (Courtesy of
                           Thoughtworks)




The iteration status lists the state of the iteration with respect to the plan. It is often
written on an information radiator. It is usually just the iteration plan items with
their current work state, usually marked either started or done, with nothing in
between. I have seen some require a third mark, integrated, for when the item
passes integration testing. Although the tasks are often so short that it is not really
useful to mark percent complete, the first example below does show one creative
way to do this.

The iteration status is created by the coordinator, in conversation with the
development team. Updating is in principle done by each developer, but typically
that requires directed effort by the coordinator. The status chart serves to broadcast
to all the rate of movement through the iteration's work list.

A good iteration status is easy for all to see and shows at a glance what has been
done versus what needs doing.

Figure 5-20 is an iteration status for the user stories on the flip charts discussed
earlier. Each was copied to a sticky note, started at the bottom left of the graph, and
moved to the right as it progressed, up as its quality improved. Viewers could tell
the state of each user story by how far to the right and how high each story's sticky
was. This picture was taken toward the end of a one-month iteration.


Figure 5-20. Iteration status on information radiator. (Courtesy of
                          Thoughtworks)




Figure 5-21 is an iteration plan marked up for iteration status. The two boxes on the
left indicate "started" and "done" (there is, of course, no interesting in-between
state). The numbers on the right are relative size estimates.
Figure 5-21. Iteration plan/status on rolling whiteboard. (Courtesy
                     of Jeff Patton and Tomax)




In this chart, the red index cards are the task cards from the planning session. They
copied the text onto the whiteboard to track iteration status. Here we see the team
using one-week iterations, with fifteen work days available between them. They are
estimating they can get 9.5 relative units of work completed this week.
Increasingly often we see people move the sticky notes across columns to show
changing status. The columns are titled Not Started, Started, and Done.

The picture shown in Figure 5-22 was taken at their thrice-weekly status meeting.
Géry is moving an item's marker from started to done.


Figure 5-22. Iteration plan and status using sticky notes. (Courtesy
                          of Géry Derbier)
COORDINATOR: VIEWING SCHEDULE
The viewing schedule is a listing of when, during the iteration or delivery cycle, the
expert user or other users should plan to come and see the new growth of the
system. This work product is needed when the users' time is not so easy to get,
they have to travel far, or there are too many of them. It is not needed if the expert
user visits the project every day or every week.

The viewing schedule is produced by the coordinator, in cooperation with the
development team at the start of an iteration. The development team uses it as a
reminder of when to target completion of their work (minor milestones). It is a
living document, the coordinator changing it as necessary to balance two opposing
forces: giving viewers and testers as much advance notice as possible and giving
the developers the most time to react to the changes in their design. It may live on
an information radiator or in e-mail.

As noted in the section Reflection on the Process, and also discussed in "We co-
located and ran two-week iterationswhy did we fail?" in Chapter 6, the viewing
schedule is more important to the outcome of the project than its modest size would
indicate.

Figure 5-23 is from the Boy Scouts tracking system.


                  Figure 5-23. Sample viewing schedule.
BUSINESS EXPERT AND EXPERT USER: ACTOR-GOAL LIST
The actor-goal list is a two-column table or use case diagram. In two-column form,
the left column names the person, organization, or computer system that will drive
the system, calling upon its service promises. The right column names that service
promise, which is the actor's goal with respect to the system, what he wants to
accomplish using the system. The goal, a short verb phrase, becomes the name of
the use case describing the details of the function.

The actor-goal list is created primarily by the business expert and expert user, and
is reviewed for completeness and prioritization by the sponsor. It gets referenced by
everyone. It gets created either within or immediately after the project chartering
activity, and updated as needed over the course of the project.

A good actor-goal list captures every primary actor (one that will drive the system)
that the system must recognize (must show specific behavior for), and for every
primary actor, every major goal of that actor with respect to the system. Goals are
stated at "user task" level, that is, complete transactions of value to the actor. (Goal
levels are described in detail in Writing Effective Use Cases). A well-constructed
actor-goal list contains entries that the sponsor and business expert feel are at a
reasonable and interesting level of activity (not too detailed, not too high level), and
they can review to declare that it is complete, omits a goal, or has unnecessary
goals.

The project team may decide to start work on the project even when the actor-goal
is known to be incomplete.

The actor-goal list is an index into the total functionality needed from the system. It
serves both as a low-precision requirements statement and also as scaffolding for
the project status. It is used to help construct both the coarse-grained project plan
(see the final example) and the fine-grained iteration plan. Some people use it
directly in reporting project plan and status.

When used for reporting the project status, the use case names (goals) are useful
for the first few releases. Later in the life of a system, the functions being requested
tend to get so small as to not be worth writing use cases for. They tend to be
features such as "hyphenation," "export to RSS format," and the like. Once that
moment is reached, the team often changes to tracking the fine-grained progress by
features rather than use cases. Why don't we just start with features, then? The
first reason is that there are usually too many features. The team needs a shorter
list to work with, to see at a glance what they will get. The second reason is that at
the start of the project, the users need to see what the system will do for them in
their work context. That is difficult to get from feature lists, but is exactly what use
cases provide.

I include the actor-goal list as a separate work product from the requirements file
(which follows) because it gets created earlier than the rest of the requirements file,
and often it is maintained separately. Figure 5-24 is an example.
             Figure 5-24. Sample actor-goal list.


Actor              Goal


Requestor          Buy something


                   Initiate a request


                   Change a request


                   Cancel a request


                   Mark request delivered


                   Refuse delivered goods


Authorizer         Change authorizations


Buyer              Change vendor contacts


Approver           Complete request for submission


Buyer              Complete request for ordering


                   Initiate PO with vendor


                   Alert of nondelivery


Authorizer         Validate approver's signature


Receiver           Register delivery


Any                Check on requests
BUSINESS EXPERT: REQUIREMENTS FILE
  In a conversation about requirements back in 2000, Kent Beck made one of
  his provocative pronouncements, that "there are no such things as
  requirements, there are only wishes." As has happened so often, I have found
  his pronouncement to be right on the mark. Try rereading this and the related
  sections with the thought in mind that when someone says, "The
  requirement(s)," they are really expressing something closer to a wish, which
  is probably adjustable under suitable circumstances.

  Particularly with incremental delivery with product and process feedback, there
  are plenty of opportunities for the sponsor and user community to learn that
  they didn't really require what they originally asked for, but perhaps something
  else would be more cost effective or more useful, or simply adequate in the
  circumstances.

  Crystal Clear is already difficult enough to adopt without me breaking standard
  convention yet again, and calling this section "The Wishes File." Therefore, I
  stay with Requirements. However, plant the seed that they are closer to
  wishes, and see if that improves the communication between the sponsors,
  users and developers about just what should be produced.

Crystal Clear requirements are not intended to be so complete and comprehensive
as to be clear specifications for an external contract programmer not familiar with
the domain (writing requirements specifications that explicit would be a waste of
money in the Crystal Clear context). The requirements file is intended to hold in
place requirements information that might otherwise be forgotten, as records of
decisions that the team needs to remember, giving a context to those decisions.

A good requirements file for a Crystal Clear project communicates to the people on
the project with their particular knowledge base and communications channels. The
more they know and the more they can learn by talking to someone close by, the
briefer the requirements can be.

The requirements file is a collection of information, indicating:

     What is to be built

     Who is intended to use it

     How it provides value

     What major constraints affect the design

The requirements file may be a written document, or it may simply be files
scattered across the disk that, taken together, comprise the requirements. In many
organizations the concept of requirements as a document is both foreign and
unnecessary. What is important is that there is a place where these things are
recorded.

There are many sensible formats that can be used for the requirements file, and
many timing strategies on when to fill in the details.

     In some cases, such as for a fixed-price, fixed-scope bid, the requirements
     need to be locked down early in the project.

     In other cases, such as for shrink-wrapped products, in-house development, or
     time-and-materials contracts, the requirements may evolve over time or be
     created in a just-in-time fashion.

Crystal Clear does not legislate any format or timing strategy. Typically, though,
requirements do evolve over the course of the project, and the team needs to both
update and adjust to the changes at the start of each iteration. The team needs to
discuss periodically in their reflection workshops just how and how often the
requirements should be updated.

Quality in a requirements document is relative to the team. One test for clarity and
completeness is if a company executive or other business expert from the same
company sits down with the business expert who wrote the requirements, they can
be satisfied that no areas are forgotten, and, within each area, they understand
what is written. Comprehensiveness means that all issues have been thought
through (this is, of course, harder to test for).

In general, a full sample requirements file is too long to insert here. One is available
online at
http://alistair.cockburn.us/crystal/articles/srd/systemrequirementsdocument.html.
It outlines typical sections in a complete requirements file, such as:

     The mission statement

     The actor-goal list, followed by use cases with annotations, particularly
     performance requirements

     Particular business rules for the use cases that may be needed; references to
     other sources of business rules, legal requirements, etc.

     Data descriptions, formats, and validation rules

     Technology requirements

     I/O protocols and formats for external communications

     A glossary of business terms (often recommended)
It is unlikely that a Crystal Clear type of project will need all of these written down,
given that they have close communication with the users and the sponsor. As an
example, Kay Johansen contributes the following complete requirements example
with the introductory note:


  Figure 5-25. Sample requirements. (Courtesy of Kay Johansen)
BUSINESS EXPERT AND EXPERT USER: USE CASES
A use case is a text collection of scenarios describing how an external actor achieves
something of value using the system. It starts with a success scenario in which the
external (primary) actor requests something of the system. That scenario describes
the actions and interactions between the system and various other actors in
satisfying the primary actor's request. After that, it describes how the system
behaves when things go wrong, possibly failing to satisfy the primary actor's
request. Use cases describe what the system should do; they don't capture UI
design, performance requirements, interface definitions, or data definitions.

The use cases are created jointly by a designer-programmer, a business expert, and
an expert user. Responsibility can move between those three roles. I write that the
business expert is responsible for them, but in my experience, it doesn't matter
which one of them is primary, as long as the others are proofreaders and knowledge
providers. It does cause trouble if one of them is absent. Nonprogrammers tend to
write loosely or ambiguously and not fully consider consequences and alternatives.
Programmers are usually good at those, but tend to get too detailed, start
describing their intended design, and get business rules wrong. Working and
reviewing together, they can cover each other's mistakes.

A use case is often written in two phases, the success scenario in a first stage, the
failures scenarios later, as the team needs delves deeper into the requirements,
either to estimate the complexity of the job or to work on the design. At some point,
the writers or the team may declare that the use cases are "complete" for the
iteration, meaning that no more use cases will be considered for that iteration and
that no more details or extensions will be added to them.

A good use case is easy to read, identifies the system's responsibilities, and
considers the most interesting failure cases. The complete set of use cases covers
all the goals the primary actors have with respect to the system, including covering
every external event that triggers the system. A good Crystal Clear use case is
different than a good use case on a larger, distributed, or life-critical project.
Because the Crystal Clear team sits together or very close and can get clarification
on the content easily, they can write in a briefer, more casual style.

Most people get too fancy about the use case format, making them very detailed
rather than communicative. For Crystal Clear projects, I suggest starting with the
two-paragraph form. This consists of a title, a description of success in the first
paragraph, and a description of failures and recovery in the second. Once the team
has practiced with the two-paragraph form, they can investigate other use case
formats (see Writing Effective Use Cases). For example, even though I understand
the two-paragraph form, I usually find it just as easy and more legible to write with
numbered steps. I always write down the use case's goal level, the name of the
system being designed, and the system's stakeholders and their interests in use
case. This additional information communicates a lot to the readers without adding a
lot of time to the writing. Try the two-paragraph form, first, though, before adding
anything else.
Figure 5-26 is an example of a user-goal-level use case in two-paragraph form from
the BSA system. Figure 5-27 is an example of a summary, two-paragraph use from
the PRTS system. (Note: An underlined phrase represents a hyperlink to another
use case.)


  Figure 5-26. Sample two-paragraph use case at user goal level.




  Figure 5-27. Sample two-paragraph use case at summary level.
EXPERT USER: USER ROLE MODEL
A role model is a two-dimensional map showing user roles and their relationships. It
highlights the focal roles, the ones the system should satisfy the most (see Essential
Interaction Design in Chapter 6). A user role is a name representing a high-level
goal that the user of the system might step into; similar roles cluster closely
together and dissimilar roles appear further apart. Relationship lines connect roles
or clusters.

The role model is created jointly by a designer-programmer, a business expert, and
an expert user. Although responsibility can move between those three roles, I attach
it to the expert user to indicate the importance of this person in the process.

The role model is used

     To prioritize work when roles, business value, focal status, and frequency of
     use are issues that affect priority of feature development

     When writing use casesthe collaborations between roles furnish use cases with
     additional actors or dependencies

     To help make specific decisions about user-interface and interaction design

     In testing when the tester assumes the goals and attributes of a user role

A good role model names all the roles that will use the system, reveals quickly the
focal roles and key relationships, and serves as a reminder to the team as to who
their software will be serving.


   Figure 5-28. Sample user-role model. (Courtesy of Jeff Patton)
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMERS: SCREEN DRAFTS, SYSTEM
ARCHITECTURE, SOURCE CODE, COMMON DOMAIN MODEL,
DESIGN SKETCHES AND NOTES
The question always arises as to just what documentation is needed. In Crystal
Clear the answer is:

  whatever the sponsor and the team decide.

There are four reasons for this answer:

     The system will always be changing, both in function and in design. The time,
     effort, and resources put into documenting the design subtract from those
     making progress toward delivering the system. The documentation will always
     be somewhat out of date and therefore incorrect.

     At the same time, the designers need to leave a trail behind, to jog their own
     memories some months down the line, and to lead other designers to
     understand what they have done.

     The above are in conflict, and the correct resolution of them depends on the
     game of software development being played on this particular project. Only
     the sponsors and the team can guess what trail is the optimal one to leave
     behind, balancing the need for progress and the need for clues. What is certain
     is that I can't, in this book, make that decision for all small teams everywhere.

     Finally, technologies change. The correct form of documentation changes
     somewhat with the technologies being used. Database systems, mainframe
     systems, scientific systems, object-oriented systems, and real-time systems
     all have different appropriate documentation formats. These things change
     often enough that, again, it is not for me in this book to legislate what is
     correct for the team; only the team knows.

Crystal Clear projects operate with two time horizons with respect to
documentation: Getting the software written (the less time spent documenting the
better), and handing the software over to a different group (the richer the
documentation the better). One might think of the first set as greedy actions
(meeting the first goal in the cooperative game), and the second as investment
actions (setting up for the next game). The two are in conflict with each other, so
the team inevitably plays a game of brinkmanship with the documentation.

Ideally, the team produces the archival documentation as late as possible, as fast
and cheaply as possible. This is allowed in Crystal Clear.

However, "none" is not a valid answer. That would only be a valid answer if it is
known that no one will maintain or extend the system later on. Such a project is
unlikely to need even Crystal Clear for its rule set.

Thus, teams using the extreme programming rules within a Crystal Clear project
must discuss with their sponsors what forms of documentation to leave behind.
They can use either XP's planning game (Beck 2002) or the blitz planning technique
to integrate this need for documentation into the ongoing project work. This is the
only addition to XP needed to be a valid implementation of Crystal Clear.

In addition to discussing what to document, the team needs to discuss how to
document it, and when. The when part is easy to understand although not so easy
to choosethe later they leave it, the more up-to-date it will be and the less it will
need to be changed. However, the later they leave it, the more likely they are not to
do it at all. There is inevitably brinkmanship involved in making the optimal choice.

The team should be creative about how to document their designs. Typed-in, paper-
based documentation is one of the most expensive, time-consuming, and least
communicative forms available (never mind that it is traditionally the most
frequently requested).

     Effective small teams supplement their typed-in documents with photographs
     of their whiteboards, flip charts, and other information radiators.

     There is no reason why a hand-drawn diagram can't be scanned in and stored
     online as an image, included in HTML or other documents.

     Paper napkins happen to be my favorite documentation medium. They can be
     posted on the wall, photographed, or scanned.

     The team can videotape one of their designers explaining and discussing a
     section of the system design with a designer from outside the team. This
     discussion should be held to ten to fifteen minutes per topic, as described in
     Agile Software Development.

Smart teams are likely to come up with their own alternate cheap and effective
documentation forms.

The points to note are that

     Some documentation is needed.

     The team is in the best position to decide what, how, and when.

     The team, in conjunction with the sponsor, are in the best position to decide
     how much is appropriate for this particular project.

Finally, software development is not just a game of communication, but also a game
of invention. Some work products facilitate the creation of new ideas and help the
people make new moves in the game. Paper-based prototyping (Snyder 2003) is an
example, as are CRC cards (Cunningham url crc, Cockburn 2001a) and the instance
diagrams in UML (Fowler 2003).

Invention-enhancing work products are not archived, and as a consequence we tend
to overlook their importance in a project. To help correct this imbalance, I call out
screen drafts as a specific work product. These help the team work out the user
interface design collaboratively with the users. They are specific, useful work
products with short lifetimes.

In the following sections, I describe three work products that almost certainly need
to be producedsystem architecture, common domain model, and screen draftsinside
of the larger category, "design sketches and notes, as needed."
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: SCREEN DRAFTS
Screen drafts are low-cost renditions of the way screens will look, used to explore
the ways that users might interact with the system, and invent better ways for them
to get their goals accomplished. Very often they are just drawings on paper
(Constantine 1999, Snyder 2003). The team may prefer screen-prototyping
software.

Screen drafts are created primarily by whichever designer programmer is designing
the user interface, in tandem with the expert user. They may hang on the wall
during the iteration, or they may get converted to software prototypes or real code
and discarded. I mention them here because, although they are transient work
products, they are immensely useful and often overlooked on projects.

A good set of screen drafts is inexpensive to construct (hence made from paper and
markers or from special storyboarding software) and easy for the expert user and
other users to walk through with respect to the use cases and usage scenarios (see
the technique for walk-throughs in Essential Interaction Design in Chapter 3).

Figures 5-29 and 5-30 are examples of screen drafts.


     Figure 5-29. Sample screen draft. (Courtesy of Nate Jones)
Figure 5-30. Another sample of screen drafts. (Courtesy of Nate
                           Jones)
LEAD DESIGNER: SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The system architecture description is text and/or drawings showing the major
components and interfaces of the system. There is a lot of controversy about just
what constitutes an architecture, when it should be made and how it should be
documented, all of which are out of scope of this book to decide. There does need to
be some description of the system's main design to unify the team members' work
and to educate follow-on system designers. On larger projects, two architectures
may occur: the technical (infrastructure) architecture and the domain architecture.
Domain Driven Design (Evans 2003) has examples of domain architectures.

The system architecture description is created by the lead designer, usually fairly
early in the first iteration. The architecture will probably evolve, particularly if the
Walking Skeleton and Incremental Rearchitecture strategies are used. This means
that the architecture document will need to be updated during each iteration.

A good system architecture speaks in the language of the technology being used
and the designer programmers. It may consist of a technical memo with descriptive
text and drawings, or just text, or just drawings. It shows or describes the major
interfaces and the interaction paths.

Figures 5-31 to 5-35 are samples of very different styles of architecture
documentation.


     Figure 5-31. Design captured by a Mimio whiteboard device.
         (Courtesy of Darin Cummins, ADP's Dealer Services)
Figure 5-32. Architecture kept on a whiteboard. (Courtesy of Nate
                             Jones)




Figure 5-33. Architecture drawn into a drawing tool. (Courtesy of
                        Jonathan House)

                        [View full size image]
Figure 5-34. Workflow architecture. (Courtesy of Marty Lacy and
                  Omar Alam, Schlumberger)

                       [View full size image]
Figure 5-35. Architecture from a non-OO system.

               [View full size image]
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: COMMON DOMAIN MODEL
The common domain model is typically a drawing, either a database schema or a
class diagram, showing the principal entities or classes used in the system. Some
teams still prefer straight text to describe their domain model.

The common domain model is created by the designer-programmers as they
understand the domain and incorporate increasing amounts of it into their design. It
is reviewed by the business expert, who may help to construct it in the first place.

There are several timing strategies for constructing the domain model. In some
cases, there is an intense domain-modeling activity at the start of the project, which
results in draft #1 of the common domain model. The model gets revisited and
adjusted continuously throughout the project after that. This is the mode of work
described in Surviving Object-Oriented Projects (p. 141). The other strategy is a
just-in-time strategy, in which the model is built incrementally and minimally, with
little or no looking ahead at future requirements. Crystal Clear does not legislate
which of these strategies is preferred. That is up to the team to discuss and decide.

There is a reason I call this work product the "common" domain model, as opposed
to the "analysis" model, the "design" model, or just the "domain" model. Having
multiple models creates two hazards to the project. The first is double maintenance:
You have to resynchronize each model as soon as either changes. Typically, that
doesn't get done, so the models simply get out of sync. The other is that there is a
tendency to think that the analysis model is magically "true" in some way, and the
design model needs justification for each difference. In actuality, there are many
"true" models of the domain. The final implementation should contain one that is
both correct and a good design with respect to maintenance, performance and
system resources. The initial analysis model may be correct, but is quite likely to be
weak with respect to those design criteria. As a result, it is a better strategy to keep
only one model of the domain, and evolve it so that it is both a valid domain model
and a strong design. This topic is discussed at length in Surviving Object-Oriented
Projects (Cockburn 1998). Eric Evans refers to the evolving common domain model
with his pattern, Ubiquitous Language (Evans 2003).

We decided on Project Winifred that the set of classes to put into the common
domain model should be the "public elements of persistent classes." I found this to
be a useful guideline. The model that results is very much what an analyst would
call an "analysis model," which means that it contains only items that should be in
the business expert's (and probably the expert user's) vocabulary and sphere of
caring. At the same time, it names classes and relationships that actually exist in
the implementationit is an "implementation model." Having an analysis model that
is an extract from the implementation model keeps the team from maintaining two
models and raises the likelihood that the entities and classes put into the
implementation actually are meaningful business terms.

A good common domain model is both understandable to the business expert and
current with the implementation.
Figures 5-36 to 5-38 are examples of domain models.


            Figure 5-36. Common domain model on paper.




 Figure 5-37. Common domain model in a CASE tool. (Courtesy of
                      Jonathan House)
Figure 5-38. A non-OO domain model. (Courtesy of the BSA
                        project)

                    [View full size image]
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: SOURCE CODE AND DELIVERY
PACKAGE
I have to include this page just so people don't think I forgot that the designer-
programmers actually produce source code and delivery packages, besides all the
various items used to plan, track, test, and describe them.

Crystal Clear does not regulate the language, naming, formatting, and commenting
conventions you use. Those are for your team to decide.

I hope you already know what source code looks like. If you really want to look at
some, turn to the JUnit test example.
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: DESIGN NOTES
Crystal Clear requires "design sketches and notes, as needed." This is an open-
ended phrase, allowing teams to write technical memos, create UML diagrams,
create WikiWiki webs[3] describing their design, take photographs of their
whiteboards, or videotape mini-lectures about the design.

  [3] http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?WelcomeVisitors



The design notes are produced by the designer-programmers continuously
throughout the project.

In terms of the theory of software development (see Chapter 7), design notes serve
one of two purposes and have different paybacks in the economic-cooperative
game.

       They can serve to remind, as part of the greedy action set, aimed at the
       primary, near-term goal of delivering this system soon.

       They can be among the investment actions, aimed at the secondary goal of
       setting up for the next game.

Even within the greedy action set, reminder markers serve a valuable service in
reminding people what they previously decided. Being only for the people who were
present (including yourself a month or two later), they are naturally drawn on
napkins, flip charts, and the like. These markers rarely need to be redrawn (and
may even lose information when redrawn).

Informing markers are created as part of the investment activity to help those who
come later to catch up to the group. They are longer and more laborious to produce.
The economic payback is that the same information doesn't have to be repeated
over and over again by the busy senior developers on the project.

It is useful to keep several things in mind when deciding what and how to produce
these markers. First, it will never be possible to convey the entire theory of the
design through these documents. Second, even the people who have been on the
project from the beginning don't have a shared or complete understanding of what
is in the code and what theory best describes it. That means the design notes can
never be complete, consistent, and fully instructive. Therefore, don't think it is your
goal to make them such. Your goal is to get them close enough so they can ask
good questions, or develop their own theory far enough that they can get into the
code and find out more on their own (and, hopefully, so that the theory they come
up with is not too far distant from your own).

Good design sketches and notes leave a trail for another designer-programmer to
follow. The best ones describe not how the system currently looks, but why certain
choices were made and others rejected.
Part of both reminding and informing is retaining and conveying the history of the
choices that were made. Recently, a few people have reported that using a Yahoo
eGroup type of chained-e-mail system, or a newsgroup-type system like Starteam
with threaded notes is useful in this fashion. These systems allow people to follow
the chain of discussion about various particular topics. I add the note that the chain
of history is more informative in both reminding and informing than is the summing
up at the end of the chain. This method is clearly suited to larger and distributed
teams. When the team consists only of three to five people all located in one room,
it may be less natural to have people go online to add these notes.

There is an ongoing cost to creating, changing, and maintaining these documents as
the design itself evolves, and a competing cost to not creating them. Just how that
tension is resolved is up to the team, including the sponsor, who must consider the
balance between the short-term and the long-term health of the system. It is
unlikely that the sponsor will be happy with no documentation at all for following
teams, and so Crystal Clear requires some design notes to be produced.

Figures 5-39 to 5-42 are examples of design sketches and notes.


   Figure 5-39. Screen shot from the Starteam newsgroup-style
 system, showing the threaded discussion trail. (Courtesy of Darin
                 Cummins, ADP's Dealer Services)

                                [View full size image]




  Figure 5-40. A reminder design note captured with the Mimio
 device hooked to a whiteboard and a laptop. (Courtesy of Darin
Cummins, ADP's Dealer Services, who says he periodically pulls up
 this and similar Mimio whiteboard captures for reexamination)
Figure 5-41. An informing note about binding visual components.
                  (Courtesy of Jonathan House)

                       [View full size image]
      Figure 5-42. Sequence diagram annotated with a textual
description, part of a series of domain model fragments intermixed
     with sequence diagram and explanatory text, each section
 illuminating just one aspect of the design. (Courtesy of Jonathan
                                House)

                        [View full size image]
DESIGNER-PROGRAMMER: TESTS
A test is preferably executable code that tests an aspect of the system.
Nonexecutable tests involve a person following a written document that describes
what the person must do to test the system. There are times when these are also
necessary.

Tests are produced continuously during each iteration. Although there may be an
external test group, I wish to highlight that it is not acceptable for the designer-
programmers just to write code and hand it over to a test group to repair. Creating
and running tests is an intrinsic part of the designer-programmer job description.

These days, with the availability of the JUnit unit test harness and its variants,
cppUnit, VBUnit, StUnit, and so on, there is little excuse for not writing automated
unit tests. GUI-driving acceptance tests are harder to automate. Good designers
find ways to automate at least data-manipulation tests, if not mouse, button, and
keystroke tests. The test harness httpUnit and its relatives help automate testing of
Web interfaces. The frameworks FIT and FITnesse[4] help business people, not just
programmers, write data-driven acceptance tests. There is a fairly strong literature
on automated testing, including books on test-driven design (Beck 2003, Astels
2003, Hunt 2004).

  [4] http://fitnesse.org



A good unit test not only tests what it is supposed to, but also has a name that
shows what "concern" is being tested (the test name reads as "test that something
is true"). Attending to readability in naming the concern means that the collection of
test case names illustrates a set of concerns that went into designing the system.
That list serves as a portion of the design documentation for the next programmer.

Good acceptance tests are readable to the domain expert, as well as testing the
normal and boundary cases of the system. This readability serves to inform the next
domain expert along.

Figures 5-43 and 5-44 are examples of JUnit tests, courtesy of Andy Pols and Jeff
Patton. Note the use of concern-based test names in both. In Figure 5-44, I include
the names of five test cases so you can see how the list of names serves as
informing markers of design concerns. (In Figure 5-43, the assertEquals message
will tell the test report reader what went wrong; in Figure 5-44, the assertEquals
message is telling the programmer what concern is being tested here. Both styles
work.)


Figure 5-43. Test cases with "concern-based" naming. (Courtesy of
Andy Pols)

public void testInitialFormDefaultsToUseTheAntBuilder() throws
Exception {
  // execute
 String result = myAction.doDefault();

  // verify
  assertEquals("Should be in input mode, once the form has been
initialised",
                                     Action.INPUT, result);
  assertEquals("Should have ant as the default builder on the input
form",
                                     "Ant", myAction.getBuilder());
}

public void testPreventsAddingDuplicateProjects() {
  // setup
  String duplicateProjectName = BeetleJuiceStub.DUPLICATE_PROJECT_NAME;

  // execute
  try {
    myAction.setName(duplicateProjectName);
    fail("Should have thrown an exception");
  } catch (IllegalArgumentException iae) {
    // verify
    assertEquals("Should have returned the correct form error message",
                              "This Project already exists.",
iae.getMessage());
  }
}




Figure 5-44. Test cases with "concern-based" naming. (Courtesy of
Jeff Patton)

public class DatabaseModelTest extends FrameworkLocalTestCase {
       public void testDataModelCanBeCreatedFromClientDirectives() {
       public void
testDataModelCanBeCreatedFromDirectivesFoundInXMLFile(){
       public void testDataModelCorrectsExistingSchema() {
       public void testTableCanDropItself()
       public void testDataModelCanDropItselfFromDB(){

// Just the one test expanded here...
       public void testDataModelCanBeCreatedFromClientDirectives() {
              DatabaseModel dm = new DatabaseModel("test");
              assertEquals("databaseModel was created and name is
correct",
                                          "test", dm.getName());

              Table tb = new Table("parent");
              assertEquals("table was created", "PARENT",
tb.getName());
              assertEquals("database model has no tables",
                                         0,
dm.getAllKnownTables().size());
              dm.addTable(tb);
              assertEquals("database model has a table",
                                         1,
dm.getAllKnownTables().size());
              assertEquals("table knows its parent model",
                                         dm, tb.getDatabaseModel());

             Column col = new Column("parentId",
java.sql.Types.VARCHAR, 20);
              assertEquals("table has no columns", 0,
tb.getAllColumns().
                                         size());
              tb.addColumn(col);
              assertEquals("table has one column", 1,
tb.getAllColumns().
                                          size());
              tb.addColumn(col);
              assertEquals("table still has one column after double
add",
                                          1,
tb.getAllColumns().size());
       }
TESTER: BUG REPORT
A bug report is a note logging an error, saying what circumstances caused the error.

Automated test harnesses such as JUnit automatically produce such reports.
Automated build-and-test systems such as Cruise Control[5] automatically produce
and e-mail them to the designated test owner. Manually run acceptance tests
require that the tester type up test reports during acceptance testing so the team
can go back and change the requirements, design, and code as required.

  [5] http://cruisecontrol.sourceforge.net



Many Crystal Clear projects have no dedicated external test team. The users
become the system testers. Even in these cases, they report bugs. A popular open
source bug report system is Bugzilla, and there are other open-source ones being
developed (e.g., http://projects.edgewall.com/trac provides Trac, which uses
WikiWiki technology for bug reporting and tracking).

A good bug report provides enough information to make the test easy to re-create.

Figure 5-45 is an example of a manually typed bug report from the BSA project.


Figure 5-45. Sample incident report. (Courtesy of the BSA project)




           Figure 5-46. Build report. (Courtesy of Nate Jones)
                                                                       Bug
Date Build Module Bug Description                       Status    Orig #


12/30 21   Client    Home link produces a 404 error    Open       NJ   52
                     from the widget.html page. Linked
                     to home.htm and should be linked
                     to index.html.


1/16 23    Client    The refresh rate entry box accepts Open      AC   70
                     non-numeric values.

                     fresh every 0.r4a min.


1/22 23    Business Receive the following error when    Open      NJ   77
           Tier     saving a purchase order.

                     busObj.PO divide by 0.


1/23 23    Web       .disco file not found.             Open      NJ   80
           Service


1/27 24    Data Tier Unable to run procedure             Closed   AC   85
                     app_getapo. Invalid parameter list.


1/27 24    Database When searching for vendors the      Closed    AC   86
                    response times out after 30
                    seconds.
WRITER: HELP TEXT, USER MANUAL, AND TRAINING
MANUAL
I assume that you have seen help text, user manuals, and training manuals before
in your life, so I won't belabor the point by describing what one is. I include these in
the work products list for completeness. The team will have to decide not only who
writes each, but also how much of it should get written for each iteration and
delivery.

Paper user manuals are increasingly being replaced by online help text, so it may be
that from a work product point of view, the two are equivalent. Remedying the
general uselessness of most online help text ("To turn on hyphenation, click the box
marked 'Turn on hyphenation'") is outside the scope of Crystal Clear.

I assign these work products to the writer role, because some teams may hire or
contract an external person to write them. Others may assign them to team
members.

For obvious reasons of size, I don't include an example here.
REFLECTION ABOUT THE WORK PRODUCTS
That is a set of work products that I feel I can defend as a group, is quite light and
still safe, and that you should be able to adapt to your situation. Some developers
break into a sweat when they see a listing of all the work products that get
produced on a project, so I hope that didn't hurt too much.

I want to thank the people who contributed the work product samples. They have
provided a wide range of different formats for your consideration. You have seen
that some people use standard, formal documentation; some use whiteboards, flip
charts, index cards, and sticky notes; and some use custom notations created with
various sorts of tools. Each group found a way to convey the needed information
with both clarity and economy.

It is worth revisiting two ideas.

     There is no single, required, core, or minimal set of work products in Crystal
     Clear, the way there is with the seven properties. Taking the intersection from
     all the successful projects I have visited yields too small a set to be generally
     safe, taking the union yields too large a set (unsafe due to its bulk). The set in
     this chapter should be close to what you need.

     The economic-cooperative game involves two goals: delivering this system and
     setting up for the next game. Crystal Clear is for small teams communicating
     closely, with both goals in mind.

Attending to the first goal means that the intermediate work products should be
quick and cheap in order to produce, with a primary emphasis on reminding
markers. They should attend to informing markers if new people will be added to
the team within the project, because they may come out ahead even within a six-
month time horizon by spending time creating a learning path for new teammates to
follow, so they don't ask quite so many questions for their first weeks.

The second goal is setting up for the next game. There is again a dual emphasis:
improving the abilities of the team members so they will be better on the next
round and setting into place informing markers for the next wave of developers.
Don't forget that the people on the team are themselves highly effective "informing
markers" and "information radiators." Build a strategy for training the next wave of
developers using the existing people (having the new people do pair programming
in rotations with existing team members is one such strategy).

Finally, there are several stakeholders in the question of documentation. The current
developers are interested in a light set of markers, primarily reminding ones.

The future developers are interested in informative (and not-so-boring) markers for
catching up to the group. And the sponsors are interested in the long-term stability
of the knowledge base.
None of these stakeholders is to be forgotten. I believe that with some
inventiveness, you may come up with even more expressive, less expensive, and
less painful ways to satisfy their combined interests.
Chapter 6. Misunderstood (Common Mistakes)
You think you are using Crystal Clear, yet your project is not working. What's
wrong? Crystal Clear can fail, but let's first double-check that you really are doing
Crystal Clear. This chapter presents sample project situations. Some of them fulfill
the intention of Crystal Clear, others violate it. The purpose here is to provide you
with a personal warning system that you are or are not in tune with the intention of
Clear.

Misinterpreting Crystal Clear is inevitable, no matter how many words I write. One
way to help reduce the misinterpretations is to discuss specific situations and
questions that have arisen.

Here are some situations I have run into. The first series indicates clear violation of
Crystal Clear; the following series discuss violations of intention and borderline
situations.
"WE COLOCATED AND RAN TWO-WEEK ITERATIONSWHY DID
WE FAIL?"
The software development community currently overuses the word iteration[1] and
underappreciates the user. The literature accentuates iterations instead of deliveries
to real users. XP calls for an on-site customer, which, while laudable, is often so
difficult to arrange that organizations simply throw up their hands and don't involve
a real user at all.

  [1] In recent discussions with user groups around the world, we are finding the phrase "iterative development" itself is problematic, because iterative
  implies rework, which many sponsors find threatening right from the start. The alternative, "incremental development," is much more reassuring as it
  implies "adding onto." To keep from constantly fighting standard terms, I have adopted the industry-standard word iteration in this book to refer to an
  internal development period. I still refer to the overall strategy as Incremental Development with Incremental Delivery, to reduce stress in the sponsors'
  minds.



Recall that Property #1 of Crystal Clear is Frequent Delivery, not frequent iteration,
and Property #6 is Easy Access to Expert Users.

The issue was driven home to me the other day when I visited a group whose habits
derived from XP. They knew about pair programming, test-driven design, automated
regression tests, short iterations, and all the rest. They had evolved over the year,
as is quite often the case, to something similar to Crystal Clear. We were doing a
reflection workshop at the time of this story. Half of the people in the room were
winding up a five-month project. They kept referring to a section of the system that
was "just plain wrong," despite the fact that it worked and had a good set of
supporting tests.

  We drew a timeline of their practices over the previous year. They had
  gathered their requirements from what was supposedly a well-informed set of
  stakeholders. After three months, they had deployed an early version of the
  system to the customer site using Web-X, and had held an online discussion of
  the system. All went well in this practice deployment.

  After the fourth month, a week before our little workshop, five future users of
  the system came to the development site and sat down with the developers to
  practice using the system. That's when they told the developers it was
  "wrong." You can imagine this shocked the development team no end. The
  Web-X deployment had somehow not caused the same detailed examination of
  the software as the visit.

  We discussed what they could have done differently and what they might do
  differently in the future. Much to our mutual surprise, the team discovered
  that they never really had had access to a "friendly user" who could take
  tentative deliveries and examine the growing system, and worse, they still
  couldn't see that they could get one in the near future.

  In other words, looking back at their timeline, they couldn't see how they
  could have avoided this major surprise.
  The story has a happy ending, I'm glad to say. This was a productive group,
  they still had a month left, so they gutted the "wrong" piece and rewrote it to
  meet the needs of the users.

This team had listened to their sponsors and users, colocated, integrated frequently,
and reflected after each of their iterations, and they hadn't seen this coming. They
still had no way to fix it. That responsibility lies with the executive sponsor, who is
the person who has to arrange for more visits by real users. Fortunately, this
particular executive sponsor is aware of the importance of the issue and is actively
engaged in improving it for future projects.

Iterations provide feedback to the team about their process, early wins for their
morale, and a steering mechanism to see they stay on track. But they do not
provide end-to-end feedback about the fitness of the software for business use. That
requires involvement of real users.

If I had to choose between two-week iterations without access to real users, or
giving up the short iterations and delivering only quarterly but having real users
come into the development lab twice in the delivery period to review growing
software, I would choose the latter. This is the reason for the work product viewing
schedule, and the reason that I stress delivery cycle over iteration cycle.
"TWO DEVELOPERS ARE SEPARATED BY A HALLWAY AND A
LOCKED DOOR."
"Oh, come on, Alistair, how much does it really matter? We can't get our people into
the same hall space. It just happens that we have a combination lock on that
hallway door."

It matters if you want the safety offered by Crystal Clear. Crystal Clear is predicated
on people exchanging small pieces of information at a high frequency over the
course of a day, without losing their ability to complete the task at hand. That speed
of communication creates a safety net for the project.

Suppose a person can stand up, look over a low partition, ask and within a few
seconds get the answer to: "Did you really mean that the users will never have to
retype their password? We have three servers in use, each with their own password
system." Her total time spent away from the task at hand is perhaps forty-five
seconds. Her ability to continue with the task at hand is excellent.

Contrast that with the same person thinking, "I don't know if I want to stop this just
yet to walk across the hall, punch in the combination. Maybe Pat isn't at her desk
right now. I'll see her sometime today." The result is either no answer at all, or
several minutes, involving a number of very different subtasks and a high chance of
getting distracted, spent away from the task at hand at least. Her ability to continue
with the task at hand is moderate at best.

When negotiating the hallway, steps, locks, a person has to deal with subtasks that
intrude on her cognitive state of mind. This breaks her line of thinking for a period
and makes getting back into the problem-solving state energy consuming. Dealing
with these cognitive shifts slows information flow between individuals several orders
of magnitude, blocking the exchanges that make a team productive and successful.

It is true that many projects have shipped software despite developers sitting across
hallways. However, team leaders repeatedly tell me, "Give me three to five
developers in one room, keep the distractions away, and I can get the software out.
Don't spread us out." That means they visit each other, draw on each others'
whiteboards, and look over each others' shoulders at their programs and tests.
"WE HAVE THIS BIG INFRASTRUCTURE TO DELIVER FIRST."
Sometimes it does take a long time to get the infrastructure set up to deliver just
the first, smallest piece of functionality. That is why the allowable increment period
is as large as three months. Any larger than that, and project leaders tell me they
can't keep focused on the design at hand and that the possibility for error in the
design is just too large. More and more, teams want to deliver new functionality in
three- to six- week time frames, saying that they don't want to wait longer than that
to get feedback. They implement a skinny version of the infrastructure first, and
then evolve the infrastructure in parallel with the functionality (the Walking Skeleton
and Incremental Rearchitecture strategies).

Crystal Clear is based on getting feedback from running code and active users. The
feedback is not just on the code, but on the requirements and the development
process, as well as on the ability of your team to deliver systems.

Rapid feedback on the code lets the team further reduce writing down requirements
and designs in excruciating detail. If you lengthen the time before you have
running, tested, examined code, you have to put more into writing just to keep the
memory of it alive. Rapid feedback on the process allows the team to locate
unexpected problems and set up corrective action. It also boosts morale and
establishes the habit of delivering that is one of the critical success factors of
working teams.

Short iterations and delivery cycles are beneficial for four reasons:

     To avoid having to write down so many design details

     To get real feedback on the design decisions

     To find and fix problems in the development process

     To establish a habit of delivering
"OUR FIRST DELIVERY IS A DEMO OF THE DATA TABLES."
No good. Each delivery cycle should produce running, tested code that is, at least in
principle, of some use to some user.

Moving to agile development requires learning how to divide the development
assignment into chunks that can be integrated end to end, exercising the full
development process and as much of the architecture as is needed for the growing
functionality.

It is a comforting trap to develop the user interface design, or the tables, or a small
prototype, and call that "a cycle" (of some sort) after which a reflection workshop is
held. I have heard of teams that called writing all the requirements "an iteration,"
and then reflected on their requirements-gathering process. This does not work for
the dual reasons that they cannot know how well they gathered and documented
the requirements until they see how it all meshed with the rest of their development
process (i.e., after delivery).
"NO USER IS AVAILABLE, BUT WE HAVE A TEST ENGINEER
JOINING US NEXT WEEK."
A test engineer is not a user. Neither is a manager or supervisor who "once worked
in the field." Your expert user validates and breaks your UI designs. A test engineer
can double-check your own tests to tell you if your code is broken, but cannot tell
you whether the system is what the users want. In a published study of project
managers, each of whom had experience with and without direct links to the users,
the project managers overwhelmingly felt that the projects with direct user linkage
were more successful than those without (Keil 1995). When they had users present,
the users alerted them, early on, to mistakes they were making in the concept and
layout of the software and allowed them to produce software better suited to the
needs of the users, with fewer unneeded features.

A Crystal Clear project can get by with relatively informal intermediate work
products because of the ability of the designers to simply ask a user at intervals no
longer than a week apart. The best projects have a user available full time, and
some can get a user to visit several mornings a week. At the very least, an hour
each week should be scheduled for user interview or shared design time.


Those were the obvious violations. Here are a set of questions and situations that
either violate the intention of Crystal Clear or question the boundary.
"ONE DEVELOPER REFUSES TO DISCUSS HIS DESIGN OR
SHOW HIS CODE TO THE REST."
As expert developer Pete McBreen said, "The days of claiming that code is private
are long gone." Willingness to discuss the design and find possible faults in her own
design or code is important.

People being willing to discuss their code is part of the Personal Safety property.
Programmers often disagree about what constitutes good design, and often are
quite nasty about it. Providing people with the needed personal safety may require
that a few people step forward and show their designs so that the team can learn
how to discuss the design technically and not emotionally.

A project is unlikely to pull off a Crystal Clear process if they are afraid to trust their
designs to their teammates. Ask yourself how you and they can manage a design
discussion without insult, letting different people work at their own levels of
competence, still sufficient to deliver a working system.
"THE USERS WANT ALL OF THE FUNCTION DELIVERED TO
THEIR DESKS AT ONE TIME . . ."
"[W]e don't want to annoy them by having to install new versions so often."

It happens with certain sorts of systems that the users can't be disturbed with many
deliveries of a changing system, especially changing user interface. However, you
should be able to bring a user in to see and use the system to get feedback on your
technical and usage design decisions. Once that portion of the system is designed,
tested, viewed, and accepted, you can relax on those decisions and move on to the
next.

Where it is not appropriate to actually install the software on the users' machines,
set the constructed, tested functionality to the side (properly versioned, of course),
and wait to add the next increment's functionality. In other words, you will develop
exactly as though you had delivered the functions to the users, even though, in this
case, you didn't. The key to the Crystal Clear process is that you get closure and
feedback on your development and deployment process, as well as your software.

Crystal Clear can be used when you cannot keep delivering system updates to all
the users. Modify the process by finding a "friendly user," and deploy the different
versions to just that one person.
"WE HAVE SOME MILESTONES LESS THAN A USE CASE AND
SOME BIGGER."
"Our milestones are like these: implement new communication commands,
implement HTML tags, implement class Blob. Some of them are inside a use case,
some of them span use cases. Will those do?"

Implementing class Blob is not an "interesting" milestone in the Crystal Clear
vocabulary. Getting a communication command implemented and tested is.
Implementing a pair of HTML tags implemented, tested, and integrated is.

There is no obvious violation here. Keep asking, "What counts as a usable piece of
functionality?"
"WE WROTE DOWN A BASIC CONCEPT AND DESIGN OF THE
SYSTEM. WE ALL SIT TOGETHER, SO THAT SHOULD BE
GOOD ENOUGH."
This is a reference to "You have a project mission statement, you are using usage-
based requirements, probably use cases, and you have a description of the system
design using one of the many description techniques you can invent," questioning
just how many requirements are needed, and how much design documentation is
needed.

I find use cases useful at the start of projects (less critical as the system fills out),
and so of course I recommend them. However, a number of teams like feature lists
or requirements formats that are neither use cases nor feature lists. Some live
almost entirely by verbal agreement. If you all sit together, then it may be enough
that you have some combination of an actor-goal list and/or user stories or use case
briefs or feature lists as your requirements "table of contents," and this is sufficient
to hold your conversations in place. There is no violation of Crystal Clear here, as
long as the sponsor and expert user are part of the agreement to work this way.

The same rule of thumb applies for design documentation.

Watch out, though, for one person becoming overly loaded as "the expert" on the
requirements or domain or master design, and slowing down the team.
"WHO OWNS THE CODE?"
I used to have a rule in Crystal Clear requiring that "every function, class, and work
product has a clear owner." During the revisions of this book, that rule dropped low
enough in priority not to make the final cut. However, code ownership is still a hot
and even dangerous topic on many projects.

On many projects, everyone is allowed to add code to any class, with the
consequence that no one feels comfortable deleting someone else's code from the
increasingly messy class. The result is something a lot like a refrigerator shared by
several roommates: full of increasingly smelly things that almost everyone knows
should be thrown out, but nobody actually throws out.

I have seen a group of three people sitting around the same workstation for days,
working their way through every class, negotiating which lines of code to delete or
move. This situation comes from absence of an ownership model and is expensive.

You have a clear ownership model for your work products if you know who it is that
can change, update, and, most important, delete any part of it. The answer may be
a single person, anyone in a given subteam, or even anyone on the team. You
should never have to have the whole team sit around the screen and ask, "Who put
this in here? What is it doing there? Can we delete it?" If you have to do this, you
know you have a breakdown in the ownership model.

One person wrote me: "Good point. We just found ourselves all sitting around the
screen last week, reviewing all the classes we have so far. It seems we had all been
adding, and no one removing. It took a full day just to sort that out. Now we are
organized with use case ownership and class ownership. Anyone can make a short-
term change to a class when we hit panic mode, but that person notifies the class
owner, who can double-check it."

People often think that XP has no ownership model. This is untrue. XP has a strong
ownership model: Any two people sitting together and agreeing on it can change
any line of code in the system. The ownership model is explicitly communal, with
the safety check that two people have to agree to the change (and also that all the
tests have to run!).

Most of the Crystal Clear projects I have visited adopt the policy, "change it, but let
me know."
"CAN WE LET OUR TEST ENGINEER WRITE OUR TESTS?
HOW DO WE REGRESSION TEST THE GUI?"
Regression unit tests are for the developers to write and use, not the test engineer.
They are there so the developers can go home at night knowing that the changes
they put in during the day did not unexpectedly wreck the system; they can make
changes with greater rapidity, find mistakes faster, and sleep better at night.

Programmers traditionally dislike writing tests, and have a tendency to pass their
code along to someone else called the tester to test as soon as the code "sort of
runs." While this is not a strict violation of Crystal Clear, it is a violation of its
intention and a bad idea, socially and professionally. Write your own tests.

This raises the question of testing again. Review Property 7, which discusses GUI-
less system tests, GUI-driven system tests, and usability tests.
"WHAT IS THE OPTIMAL ITERATION LENGTH?"
I don't know that there is an "optimal" iteration length in general. I have heard
adequate defense of everything from one week to one month. It is useful to bear in
mind the different negative effects come from them being too long, too short, and
all the same.

Too long. Most development organizations use iteration lengths of anywhere from
three months to two years. This produces the rhythm so neatly described on the
Scrum eGroup by Daniel Gackle (who was writing about even a monthly iteration!):

  "Meander, meander, meander, realize there isn't much time left, freak out, get
  intense, OK, we're done. Repeat monthly."

This "meander, meander, freak out, get intense" syndrome is one that incremental
and iterative development is supposed to remove. The question remaining is, How
long is too long for you?

Two good initial choices are two weeks and one month. Two-week iterations could
be good, because this cycle length will illustrate to the programmers how much they
need to change. It will teach them to estimate in small quantities and develop in
micro-increments. It may, however, be too difficult initially. A cycle length of one
month is less of a shock to the system and may allow the team to ease into the new
approach. You may find, however, that one-month iterations are not efficient enough
for your purposes.

You will, of course, be holding reflection workshops after each iteration, so you can
question the iteration length within a few iterations. Some groups change from two
weeks to a month, others from a month to two weeks. I have even met teams that
change the iteration length depending on where they are within the project! (For
those interested,[2] they use one-week iterations at the start of the project to avoid
the "meander" syndrome described earlier, move to two-week iterations as they hit
their stride, and go back to one-week iterations as they near the end, in order to
fine-tune the scope-cutting and deal with late-breaking requirements changes and
integration errors.)

  [2] Thanks to Jeff Patton for this note.



Too short. Iteration start-up and shut-down is not free, so if the iterations are too
short, the team will get frustrated at restarting so often. Even people who like short
iterations sometimes comment on the nuisance of having to do planning and
estimation every Monday morning. In addition, if you don't have good automated
integration and acceptance tests, the testing burden will be too high.

Also on an eGroup discussion, Patrick Parato noted about one-week iterations:

  The only drawback we have seen is that the development team fizzles out
  close to the end of the iteration. The tasks will be all complete but people don't
  want to admit it because the one week iterations make them feel constantly
  under pressure. The developers don't really like the feeling that they can't vary
  their effort depending on mood, health, or other external stimuli. Some
  developers believe that one month long iteration allows them more freedom to
  vary their pace, and that the one week iteration is too much pressure. Very
  similar to micromanagement.

Monotony. Patrick's note introduces the topic of monotony. As mentioned earlier,
human beings seem built for rhythm, and the need for this shows up in
incremental/iterative development. An increasing number of people are reporting
that when they do short iterations for a year or two, a feeling of burnout sets in,
just from the flatness of their work life. This occurs even when and even though
they are delivering good code to their customers regularly.

You can take two steps to prevent this monotony. The first is to attend to your
iteration and delivery completion rituals (see Chapter 4). At the end of your
iteration, decompress or celebrate, whether that means a walk in the woods or a
group trip to the pub. Arrange to do something different after delivering new code.
Some teams use the period right after delivering to clean up the mess they created
in the code just before delivery (Hohmann 1977), others allocate time for some
personal development. People use the reflection workshop and iteration planning to
create a change of pace.

The second step applies if you are using shorter iteration lengths, such as one week.
Bundle these into some form of supercycle, perhaps every four or six iterations to a
supercycle. Arrange a rhythm shift to occur at the boundaries of the supercycle, a
team outing, picnic, treat, trip to the movies, half-day off, or some days for
development of personal topics.

Some teams like to allocate a quota of time for people to work on miniprojects not
directly related to the project. Some put marks in the code or on the whiteboard
about ugly places in the code they'd like to have time to clean up. Some allocate
time for people to investigate new technologies. Both of these are "investment"
activities, which improve the programmers and the system and also provide a
change of pace.

A final idea is to allow programmers to spend time with real users of their system in
their work environment. This not only breaks the monotony, but, as Tom
Poppendieck and others have pointed out to me, developers find it highly
motivating.
Chapter 7. Questioned (Frequently Asked)
Readers may be curious about how these ideas arose, how they compare with
others in the industry, how far they can be stretched, and what to do when they
don't seem to apply. The chapter is presented in question-and-answer form to allow
for "talking about" the ideas, everything from philosophical foundations to "How do I
get started?"

Crystal Clear works because software development is an economically constrained
cooperative game of invention and communication, and the rules of Crystal Clear
improve both the invention and cooperation aspects of the team's work.

Paradox though it may seem, it is precisely the lack of requirements and planning
documents together with having team members in the same room that improve the
odds of success. The team members get quick feedback on both the process and the
product, and there is only a short distance between them and the people who need
to know the information. A person who learns something can pass it along to the
others with very little communication cost. A person needing to know something can
get an answer with similarly little communications cost. By making it easier to
coordinate, with less to coordinate, the team reduces both cost and error.

In this chapter, I start right from the very beginning: the research that gave rise to
the recommendations, the underlying idea of software development being an
economic-cooperative game, and the philosophical heritage of the embodied
worldview. These conversations are fairly heavy and not for every reader. As one
person put it, Crystal is "short on practices and long on principles."[1] These
questions allow me to talk about the principles. After the principles, I review the
boundary conditions of Crystal Clear, as distinct from Crystal Orange, for example,
and the lack of required techniques. I discuss the structure of methodologies in
general, and how that influences the structure of this book and Crystal Clear in
general. I include a summary chart for Crystal Clear.

  [1] Thanks to Andy Pols of the United Kingdom.



After the first four, heavy questions, I discuss the way in which this book is laid out,
how Crystal compares with Scrum, XP, and with ISO 9001 and CMM(I)
requirements, distributed and larger teams. Finally, the last question, "How do I get
started?"
QUESTION 1. WHAT IS THE GROUNDING FOR CRYSTAL?
The first and best grounding is empirical. The empirical evidence started showing up
after I was employed in 1991 by the then fledgling IBM Consulting Group to create a
methodology for their forthcoming object technology projects. I didn't know
anything special about methodology then, so my boss at the time, Kathy Ulisse,
suggested that I visit and debrief project teams to find out what they had learned
(thank you, Kathy!). From then to now, I visited projects both inside IBM and
outside IBM, in all parts of the world. I continue these project debriefings even now,
because what people report is both informative and surprising.

What I learned was that most of what had been written in the methodology books
was quite irrelevant to life on the project and had very little to do with the project's
likelihood of success. In fact, until the arrival of XP, the correlation was inverted; the
more occupied the group was with following the strictures of the methodology, the
less likely it was that they would deliver the software in a timely fashion.

The projects I interviewed that had succeeded often had a sloppy-looking process.
These successful people talked about topics that were not method related, but
communication and delivery related: sitting close together, having quick access to
expert users, delivering frequently, and getting feedback quickly.

Initially, I took down all these notes, and didn't know what to do with themafter all,
I had been charged with writing down a "methodology," which was supposed to
consist of roles, work products, milestone standards, and the like. It was only after
several years of interviews, three or four attempts to write down a useful
methodology, and working directly on projects that the message started to sink in
properly: Those really are the core properties of success; the techniques and work-
product details of the "methodology" are really a second order success factor. Get
the people close together, communicating with goodwill, delivering often and getting
quick feedback from the users, and the team will probably sort out the rest on their
own, using whatever technology and techniques they know.

Looking back over my notes from ten years of interviewing, these same
recommendations surfaced over and over again. I slowly recognized that they form
a methodology, one that contains few specific rules, but allows the people to act as
educated professionals in their fields and work out the best path to success on their
own. The problem that has occupied me for the years since that realization has been
just how to write it down in a way that another team could follow, how to identify
which pieces are more critical than others, and how to describe the allowable
variances. My best current guess is this book.

The second grounding consists of a set of principles distilled from watching software
projects in social-anthropologist fashion and from reading literature on human
communication and process design. I described these principles at length in Agile
Software Development (Cockburn 2002), and in my doctoral dissertation, People
and Methodologies in Software Development (Cockburn 2003a). I list and
summarize the principles here:
1. Different projects need different methodology trade-offs. This should be
   completely obvious. Judging from the ongoing initiatives at large companies
   around the world to create and standardize a single methodology for all their
   projects, however, it is evidently not obvious. In "Selecting a Project's
   Methodology" (Cockburn 2000), I proposed two axes for selection: the number
   of people needing to be coordinated and the degree of damage that could be
   caused by the system malfunctioning. These two axes explain why Crystal is
   not a single methodology but a family of methodologies, and serve as a basis
   for selecting a particular Crystal methodology to start from. Of the two axes, I
   consider the number of people being coordinated as the most significant to
   start with; the team can often shape the methodology for the other axis.

2. Larger teams need more communication elements. Team size is the
   critical distinguishing element between members of the Crystal family. Crystal
   Clear, for example, is only recommended for teams that can achieve osmotic
   communication. Once the team grows to more than a dozen people, or sits
   more than thirty seconds' walk from each other, different communication and
   coordination modes are needed.

3. Projects dealing with greater potential damage need more validation
   elements. A small team of six or fewer people programming the movement of
   boron rods in a nuclear reaction should, I hope, use more care in their work
   than the same six people programming a free-time system, perhaps to
   organize their recipe collection, keep track of the neighborhood's football team
   scores, or order food for late night work. The difference is in the verification
   and validation dimension, not in the coordination and communication
   dimension. For the nuclear reactor, there should be public reviews and walk-
   throughs of the requirements, the design, the code, and the tests . . . it should
   be manifestly and publicly clear that the system works. That amount of
   verification is unlikely to be worth the time, energy, and monetary cost on the
   free-time projects. Crystal Clear does not natively address the life-critical level
   of damage. A team working on such a project can only use Crystal Clear as a
   starting point and must add additional verification elements to fit their
   situation.

4. A little methodology does a lot of good; after that, weight is costly. Not
   much work has been done on the diminishing returns aspect of methodologies.
   The surprising news is that a little goes a long way, and diminishing returns
   set in very quickly. This is surprising because there seems to be a reflex
   response that "more methodology is better," meaning that more process, more
   documents, and more status reporting will improve the likelihood of timely
   delivery. My interviews indicate the reverse, that less is generally better, as
   long as one covers the gaps with personal communication. Jim Highsmith
   gives the advice to start with less than you think you need...that's probably all
   you need; it is easier to add some as you go along than to remove as you go
   along. That advice is incorporated into Crystal Clear.

5. Formality, process, and documentation are not substitutes for
   discipline, skill, and understanding. This principle from Jim Highsmith
   (2003) articulates what is different between agile and traditionally predictive
   or plan-driven projects. Software is built by people who need to invent and
  communicate their ideas, based on their skill and understanding. Large
  corporations often make the mistake of thinking that having people fill out
  forms, follow particular steps in development, and document the current state
  of their code will confer upon them skill in inventing solutions. However, the
  three elements that Jim highlightsdiscipline, skill and understandingare all
  internal properties of a person and cannot be substituted for by the external
  forms.

6. Interactive, face-to-face communication is the cheapest and fastest
   channel for exchanging information. Two or three people standing at a
   whiteboard, diagramming and talking, are able to take advantage of a wealth
   of communication channels and get near-instantaneous feedback. They can
   see each other's expressions and change sentences in mid-utterances. They
   can move closer and farther, point, gesture, make facial movements, draw,
   and talk all at the same time, interrupting each other and adding to the
   drawing as they go. This sort of exchange situation is known as warm,
   meaning that it is rich in information and also in emotion. As the people move
   to telephone, e-mail, and eventually paper, the richness, speed of interaction,
   and emotional content diminish, and the communication is known as cooler.
   Although there are certain advantages to using cooler communications
   channels (asynchrony and isolating social-emotional reactions are two of
   them), there is a tremendous loss in communication efficiency, which on a
   software project translates to lost time and increased mistakes. Since most
   projects are time and cost sensitive, Crystal Clear maximizes rate of progress
   for time and money expended by keeping the communications close and rich
   (osmotic communication).

7. Increasing feedback and communication reduces the need for
   intermediate deliverables. Many methodologies are full of what I call
   "promissory notes." These are documents that promise that the team will build
   such-and-so, which will be built at such-and-such a time and will look like this
   or that. These promises are primary needed because there is such a long time
   delay between when the promise is made and when the software is delivered.
   With such a long time delay, it is of course natural that the sponsors,
   examiners, and users want to know that progress is being made and what the
   final system will look like. The problem with these promissory notes is that
   very often the neat plans and designs don't work out as promised. If, in
   contrast, the team builds something and shows it to the users every month,
   the time delay is short enough that they don't have to make elaborate
   promisesthey simply show the month's results and learn directly and correctly
   what is right and what is wrong. Software development is still slow enough
   and expensive enough that some promissory notes are neededthe delivery
   plan and use cases being twobut the principle is still that the shorter the time
   delay, the fewer intermediate "promissory" notes are needed.

8. Concurrent and serial development exchange development cost for
   speed and flexibility. This principle says that properly executed concurrent
   development can speed development, at a possibly higher salary cost,
   compared with correctly executed serial development, in which each task is
   run to completion before the next task is started.[2] The problem with the lower
   cost serial development is that any mistake in understanding causes a ripple
       effect of rework, which is expensive. It is predicated upon having very stable
       requirements and a full understanding of the domain and the implementation
       technology. It is very rare in software projects that the requirements and the
       technology are well enough understood to permit these efficiencies to be
       harvested. The Crystal family is therefore built upon concurrent development,
       which permits real-time discovery of mistaken assumptions, but at the same
       time requires better communications between the people (which gets back to
       close communication and osmotic communication).
            [2] The third chapter of Simultaneous Management (Laufer 1998) describes how to mesh concurrent and serial development on
            the same project to take advantage of each. As interesting as the techniques is the fact that his stories come from civil
            engineering projects (e.g., building a hospital or an airstrip in the jungle).


  9. Efficiency is expendable in non-bottleneck activities. The book, The Goal
     (Goldratt 1992), identifies that every process has a "bottleneck" station, one
     that constrains the speed of the entire enterprise. Software development is no
     different. What the book does not draw upon, but the Crystal family does, is
     the corollary, that the non-bottleneck stations can help in certain ways,
     operating at lower efficiencies. Efficiency becomes an expendable commodity.
     In software development this manifests itself when people with spare capacity
     help to write requirements, tests, or documentation; or, when the developers
     (assuming they have spare capacity) start work before the requirements are
     finalized, taking upon themselves the likelihood of later rework. Examples of
     these situations are described in Agile Software Development. Identifying the
     bottleneck station and making use of spare capacity should become a core
     part of the team's methodology shaping workshops.

 10. "Sweet spots" speed development. The best of all possible worlds is
     having (1) dedicated, (2) experienced people who (3) sit within earshot of
     each other, (4) use automated regression tests, (5) have easy access to the
     users, and (6) deliver running, tested systems to those users every month or
     two. Such a project is clearly in a better position to complete successfully than
     one missing those characteristics. (It is surprising that sponsoring executives
     do not pay more attention to these important success factors.)

       Crystal Clear is built upon and legislates the last four of those sweet spots.
       Obviously, it is a rare team that can be staffed with experienced people, and
       so Crystal Clear works with the assumption that the project is staffed with a
       mixture of experienced and novice developers (although it does require that
       the lead designer is experienced). When the team cannot hit one of those
       sweet spots, then they need to invent a way to get closer to it. The Focus
       property is about allowing the team to get close to the first sweet spot even
       when they are not fully dedicated to just one project. What to do when some
       of the other sweet spots are missed is taken up in later questions.

Since it is hard to remember ten principles, I derive them from one idea, that of the
economic-cooperative game described at length on my Web site,[3] in Agile Software
Development, and in "The End of Software Engineering and the Start of Economic-
Cooperative Gaming" (Cockburn 2004b).

  [3] http://Alistair.Cockburn.us.
The cooperative game manifesto says:

  Software development is a series of resource-limited, goal-directed
  cooperative games of invention and communication. The primary goal of each
  game is the production and deployment of a software system; the residue of
  the game is a set of markers to assist the players of the next game. People
  use markers and props to remind, inspire and inform each other in getting to
  the next move in the game. The next game is an alteration of the system or
  the creation of a neighboring system. Each game therefore has as a secondary
  goal to create an advantageous position for the next game. Since each game
  is resource-limited, the primary and secondary goals compete for resources.

The advantage of this phrasing is that it highlights a couple of critically important
aspects of software development:

     It is the people and their invention and communication that make software
     happen. Everything that relates to their speed of invention and communication
     affects the outcome of the project. This specifically includes proximity,
     community, amicability, conflict, and trust as have been discussed at length in
     this book.

     There are two goals in motion at every instant: delivering the present system
     and setting up for the following game. They conflict, requiring some nontrivial
     combination of short-term "greedy" and long-term "investment" actions.

     Every decision, by every person involved, has economic consequences. Since
     the situation is overconstrained and underresourced, this typically means you
     will hurt no matter what you do; you only get to choose in which way to get
     hurt. If you spend too much time in investment actions, you get hurt in the
     short term (and maybe the long term); if you do too many greedy actions, you
     get hurt in the long term; and there is probably no middle safe ground. Don't
     fall asleep.

I generate most of my methodology recommendations and project management
strategies from the cooperative game manifesto. Considering the state of the
project, the two goals, and the nature of human-to-human communication, I am
able to choose where to abbreviate, where to spend extra effort, when to put people
closer together, and when to put them further apart. (Yes, there are indeed times to
separate them and reduce communication! See "The Cone of Silence" (Cockburn
2004b).)


The Swedish researcher Pelle Ehn and Danish developer Peter Naur provide
additional grounding to these ideas based on the philosophers Descartes, Marx,
Heidegger, Wittgenstein, and Ryle. Ehn examines the first four of these philosophers
in his excellent but sadly out of print Work-Oriented Development of Software
Artifacts (Ehn 1988).[4] I summarize his extensive discussion in a brief and
necessarily coarse fashion as follows:
[4] An extract from Ehn's writing is included in Appendix B of Agile Software Development.




     Descartes gives us a worldview that there is an objective reality that can be
     described. This worldview underlies and informs mainstream traditional
     software development. The assignment of the development team is to capture
     that reality in their requirements, in their code, and then again in their
     analysis models, designs, and documentation.

     Wittgenstein gives us an opposing worldview, that is, there is no objective
     reality that we can articulate and agree upon. Rather, we are all engaged in
     ongoing "language games" that evolve over time and that externalize a
     meager part of our understanding at any moment in time. The development
     team never "captures" the requirements, because neither the requirements
     nor the people's understandings are either expressible or shared. What
     happens instead is a sort of dance in which the various people perform actions
     and make utterances, and react to the actions and utterances of everyone else
     and also themselves. Although this description may seem untidy and vague, it
     matches my particular understanding of what happens on projects and forms
     the deepest underlying basis for the Crystal family and Crystal Clear most
     particularly.

     Marx gives us the worldview that every new software system will change the
     social-power structure. Accordingly, the users, the executive, and the
     developers should include in their development process an inquiry into how
     the system will shift power and how to handle that shift. This worldview is
     taken into account to a small extent by the agile methodologies, who give a
     larger voice to the users. It was taken deliberately into account by Kristin
     Nygaard, Pelle Ehn, and the Scandinavian school of development in the 1970s
     and 1980s, when they were working with the local trade unions on where and
     how to incorporate computer technology into the unionized workplace.

     Heidegger discussed the nature of tools, as being either visible to the wielder
     as a tool object, or invisible to the wielder, as simply an extension to his body
     that accomplishes the needed task. While the tool is visible to the wielder
     ("Gee, this hammer is heavy," or, "Where's that hyphenation key, again?"), the
     tool interferes with the performance of the task. When the wielder is
     performing the task at full speed, he does not notice its existence at all. This
     discussion is important to the designers of the user interface and also of the
     domain model, both of which can interfere with the system's usability.

     Ryle's views are discussed by Peter Naur in "Programming as Theory Building"
     (Naur 1992). Naur incorporates Ryle's idea of "theory" to describe the way in
     which a designer-programmer has to understand the domain at hand, the
     requirements, the technology, and the proposed design solution. For a
     designer to make sympathetic changes requires him to have an understanding
     rich enough to be mined for implications and causes. For a group of people to
     make harmonious design decisions, they have to have in their separate heads
     theories that are "close" to each other. To me, this explains very neatly the
     metaphor element of XP: the metaphor is a short phrase which points to the
       theory of the system's design; the better the team's agreement on the
       metaphor, the more likely they are to make harmonious design decisions (see
       Agile Software Development, p. 239).

Naur's idea of each person having his own theory of the system and the difficulty of
aligning the multiple theories across the development team fit naturally with Ehn
and Wittgenstein's notion of language games and the dance of actions and
utterances that move people to greater alignment of language and understanding.

Ehn discusses the idea of people laying down markers of their current
understandings, so they can refer back to them later. Naur's writing leads one to
recognize that the subtlety of people's understandings change over time and that
the current design, beautiful or ungainly, really is a mirror of their current
understanding.[5] As their theory matures, it becomes more subtle, and they get a
more concise and natural design expression.

  [5] Ward Cunningham said almost identical words to me back in 1994. I might not have noticed it in Ehn and Naur's writings if Ward had not already
  mentioned it.



There is a negative side to having a more subtle theory. The design becomes more
subtle over time, which means that the maintainer also needs to develop a similarly
subtle theory to take over the code! Really experienced developers find this
frustrating, because it means that their best, cleanest, most concise code is virtually
unmaintainable! They watch in horror as the people who follow them unpack the
design to become bigger, clumsier, and more evident to the casual observer!

This observation brings into question the very idea of quality in design. One of the
very many dimensions of quality is the ability to maintain and evolve the code. To
the more experienced developer, the subtle design is "better." He can, with his
subtle understanding, adjust the system to new circumstances with just the smallest
of changes. That same code is nearly unmaintainable to the person with a less
developed theory. With the less-subtle design, the second person will take longer
and have to make more extensive changes, and at the same time find that less
subtle design "easier" to maintain and extend. I see no way out of this dilemma; it
seems just another of those contradictory situations that infest software
development.

Experiential, cognitive, and philosophical groundings suggest that the best way to
develop software is to use so few people that everything can be communicated in
face-to-face discussions, letting small groups finesse problems by relying on
common sense and skill and holding the behaviors and artifacts together by
adopting only a few principles of development, such as direct user involvement and
tracking by finished products. These are the foundations of Crystal Clear.

Readers who care about such things should examine Ehn and Naur's writings to
better understand the philosophical and cognitive underpinnings of the Crystal
approach.


There is a mostly unstated bias in Crystalthat of generally trusting people. That bias
comes from me. Psychological baggage inevitably seeps from a methodology author
into his recommendations, and this one is mine.

It is not a blind trust, though. Although teams perform better and use less energy
when they can work in trust, not all people are able to trust others, nor do all people
deserve trust. Some people, playing their own game of career survival, are quite
willing to take advantage of their teammates or suboptimize the project results if it
will enhance their careers. Others are not capable of fulfilling their assignments. Still
others simply don't care. In general, every person is watching all the others to see
when the trust will fail. This is one reason that the targeted property of Crystal Clear
is only "personal safety," and not full trust.

The manager of a "cooperative gaming" team must notice and attend to failures in
trust. One dilemma that periodically shows up is this: The executive sponsor asks
the programmers how long a set of tasks will take. They answer, the executive
sponsor accepts, and the programmers start work. As time passes, the executive
sponsor gets this uncomfortable feeling that the programmers are taking advantage
of him. Does the assignment really take that long (the programmers are working
diligently), or are they taking advantage of the situation and padding their time
estimates so they can relax along at an arbitrarily slow pace?

There is no way to resolve the question, either in Crystal or in any other
methodology. Either could be true, and I have encountered what I believe are
examples of both.

Software development is a game of people working with and against other people.
All human motives and emotions apply and must be taken into account, even in
Crystal.
QUESTION 2. WHAT IS THE CRYSTAL FAMILY?
Crystal is a family of methodologies based on a genetic code that allows different
family members to be generated for different circumstances. All members will share
a family resemblance.

The genetic code consists of:

       The economic-cooperative game model just described

       A set of priorities and principles for making choices

       Selected properties to steer toward

       Sample strategies and techniques

       Sample instances to copy

The three priorities are project safety, development efficiency, and habitability of
the resulting conventions.

The safety priority is to get a reasonable business result from the project, given the
project's priorities and resource constraints. Efficiency in development is a top
priority because so many projects are economically overconstrained.

Habitability became a top priority when I started noticing in my project interviews
that most programmers have the power to ignore whatever methodology is
mandated by their organization. All they have to do is say that it slows them down
and they'll miss their deadline if they do all that extra work. That is usually sufficient
basis for ignoring it. To be fair, most methodologies are so inefficient that they are
correct in their statement, so it is not clear whether they are doing the organization
a disservice or a favor by ignoring the methodology (my estimate is that there is an
immediate 15 to 30 percent efficiency to be gained in most organizations simply by
throwing out most of their process[6]). If the programmers are told they have to do
it anyway, they usually find ways to circumvent it. It doesn't matter what the
methodology is if it doesn't get used. In other words, habitability is a critical success
factor of methodology adoption.

  [6] As Luke Hohmann points out: "When you want your boat to go fast, it is easier to cut anchors than add horsepower."



Part of habitability is tolerance for human variation. Some like to make lists, others
don't; some work best visually, others with text; some like to work alone, others in
groups. Some stare at the design for hours, days, or weeks making sure it is right,
while others like to "feel" the code taking shape. It is for this reason that Crystal has
so much tolerance around techniquesnot only do they change all the time, but
different people are drawn to different techniques. The habitability priority means
that the rules need to be such that the people on the team can live with them.
The priorities interact. Habitability means that I accept that a chosen set of rules
may not be as efficient as possible. The safety priority means that the chosen rules
should be good enough to get an adequate result (making exception, of course, for
poor project managers and greedy sponsors, both of which still exist).

Part of efficiency and habitability is dealing with the fact that every project is slightly
different, and so properly needs its own, tailored methodology.

This means that no one methodology will suffice for the range of projects that even
a midsized company will encounter.

A company need not define dozens of methodologies though. One company with
widely diverse projects was able to get away with just three base methodologies:
one for under-four-person projects, another for projects of eight to twenty people,
and a third one for systems that have to pass the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration process certification. Each team tailors the nearest base methodology
to their project's particular requirements, expertise, and technology characteristics.

Of course, they have to do this tuning quickly enough to fit within the business's
cost-value horizon. If methodology shaping takes half the project budget, then it
would indeed be better to use a suboptimal but standard methodology. The need for
efficient methodology shaping is why I describe the methodology shaping and
reflection workshop techniques in this book.

Those are the priorities. The properties are just those described in Chapter 2. No
strategies or techniques are required for a team, other than incremental
development. The set of allowed strategies and techniques is very large, and so I
present just a few of the more interesting and less known ones in Chapter 3.
Methodology samples are included in Surviving Object-Oriented Projects (Cockburn
1998), Agile Software Development (Cockburn 2002), and, of course, this book.

To help with choosing a set of rules for to a particular project, I constructed the two-
dimensional grid shown in Figure 7-1.


       Figure 7-1. Crystal's coverage of different project types.
This grid[7] identifies team size, the number of people being coordinated, as the
primary axis with respect to defining methodologies. A second important dimension
is criticality, the potential damage caused by an undetected defect: loss of comfort
(C), loss of discretionary moneys (D), loss of essential moneys (E), and loss of life
(L). We should expect to see the communication and coordination components of
methodologies change noticeably as the team keeps doubling in size. We should
expect to see the validation and verification components change noticeably as the
criticality increases up to loss of life (where the FDA process approval can become
relevant). In Figure 7-1, the box labeled C6 signifies projects with up to six people
working on a loss-of-comfort system.

  [7] Described in (Cockburn 2000) and in Agile Software Development.



The name Crystal derives from these two dimensions, in an analogy with geological
crystals, which also are characterized in two dimensions: color and hardness. I let
the team size (more generally, the communication and coordination complexity)
correspond to the darkness of the color: clear, yellow, orange, red, maroon, blue,
violet, and so on, and the criticality correspond to mineral hardness: soft as quartz
for loss-of-comfort systems, hard as diamond for loss-of-life systems.

Figure 7-1 shows sixteen boxes, implying the need for at least 16 methodologies to
be defined. My experience is that if a group starts from a previously documented
methodology and shapes on the fly with the Methodology Shaping Workshop and
the Reflection Workshop, things can simplified. One suggestion is to put the life-
critical projects into their own area, and cluster the rest by team size. This leaves
one primary dimensioncoloras the distinguishing characteristic for non-life-critical
methodologies. I don't have enough experience yet to know how the life-critical
methodologies cluster, but the company mentioned above decided that all their FDA-
approval projects with less than 20 people could be clustered together. They didn't
have any projects at all with more than 20 people, so they simply had three
categories, which we might call clear, yellow, and diamond.
QUESTION 3. WHAT KIND OF METHODOLOGY DESCRIPTION
IS THIS?
The predominant way of conveying a methodology is through an element-by-
element description of approximately one dozen different types of elements. Figure
7-2 shows a generic and typical set of methodology element types. A little
multiplication shows that even a fairly simple methodology requires the description
of over a hundred separate elements, plus how each fits with all the others. Most
methodologies contain several hundred elements, and Extreme Programming has
about four dozen. You can immediately see why methodology descriptions are so
long (and boring).


Figure 7-2. Element types of a methodology with sample elements.




Part of the methodology text describes the "factory" where the software is produced
(I don't like the historical connotations of that word but can't find another). The
nonfactory part of the methodology describes how the work products are to be
described. Figure 7-3 shows the separation of methodology elements into factory
and product descriptors (with time flowing downward in the diagram).


   Figure 7-3. Division of methodology into "factory" and product
                             descriptors.
On the right, we see the original, fuzzy, and imprecise descriptions of the product
(vision and mission statement, conceptual prototypes) at the top, evolving over time
into intermediate work products such as requirements and plans, and eventually
into source code, tests, packaging, and user manuals. The elements of the
methodology covering this evolution live in the realm of notations and techniques.
Thus we see that UML is a product-description notational standard (which explains
both why it is useful and still affects the outcome of projects so little).

The two vertical slices on the left are the factory and its control system, both made
of people. The people producing the software live in an organizational structure,
which changes over time. The people causing those changes live in their own
organizational structure, which is also changing over time. The elements of the
methodology covering these concern people, organization, and culture. Historically,
software development groups have been averse to explicit discussion of their
organizational and cultural elements, which has been a continual source of
dysfunction in our field.

The horizontal arrows indicate the tools that the people use to create and alter the
work products.

I have used these frameworks to describe methodologies for years. Two flaws in
them are, however, slowly becoming both apparent and painful.
One flaw is the idealization of people into roles. A methodology description is, by its
very nature, a formula intended to cover multiple projects, and the main part that
gets abstracted away is personality. The problem is that people are simply stuffed
full of personality, so that the people who show up at work don't have the correct fit
with the roles that are supposed to be in operation. It is not a "tester" who comes to
work in the morning, it is Jim; it is not a "project manager," it is Annika; it is not a
"designer," it is Peter. Annika may or may not have the personality needed for a
good project manager, Peter may or may not have the skill set needed to be a good
designer (see Figure 7-4).


   Figure 7-4. Methodologies idealize personality, but people are
                         stuffed full of it.




In practice, individual personalities dominate. Peter may get offended by Annika and
refuse to turn in reports; Annika may find Jim hard to talk to and ignore him for
weeks at a time; or, as often happens, Peter may simply take over the project,
ignore Annika, and drive the project in any direction he wants.

The second flaw in the standard presentation of methodology is that there are an
arbitrary number of unclassified items that don't fit into the methodology diagram
but turn out to be important to the way the project runs. I have encountered as
critical "methodological" items the shapes of the desks; the layout of rooms; the
presence or absence of ventilation; a cultural tradition of Thursday afternoon
volleyball games or Friday night beer busts; the establishment of a cultural
signature such as a logo, saying, ritual, or a value such as excellence, working late,
or always being laid back; and rules such as "salespeople are not permitted in the
programming area after 10:00 A.M." or "no phone calls or conferences between
10:00 and 12:00."
To summarize, I found four knotty issues in methodology descriptions:

     They are long, intricate, and boring.

     Factory description gets intertwined with product description.

     They miss many small rules and issues that have large effect.

     They miss the effects of individual people with personalities.

I decided to deal with these four issues in the following way:

Different people come to a methodology description from different backgrounds and
are able to notice different things (similar to the blind men feeling different parts of
an elephant and trying to form their impression of the whole). I therefore have
written the chapters in different formats to give different views for different reader
backgrounds. I do not legislate techniques, but leave those up to the individuals as
professionals in their respective fields. The work products are presented via
samples, so that I don't get tied into notational standards that are likely to change
every few years. As a result Crystal Clear is primarily a description of the factory:
where people sit, how they interact, and so on.

To cover the many small rules that are important to projects, I experimented in
describing methodologies using patterns instead of the methodology 12-tuple. Much
to my delight, I found that I could describe many aspects of a methodology that
were important, including the odd little rules, in a way that was easily understood
and applied by busy project teams. Those aspects that didn't fit as patterns could
simply be expressed as project conventions.

Out of those experiments I learned that a methodology is nothing more than the
conventions the team agrees to adopt! These conventions drift over time, and so
there is nothing more natural than that the team should convene regularly and
review their operating conventions. This is, of course, the reflection workshop. Also,
conventions are no harder to write down than simple sentences, which means they
can be written and posted. This is shown in the example of the team conventions
work product.

Studying the patterns literature, I discovered that good patterns fall into two sorts:
properties and strategies. Some are ambiguously both, but usually one can decide
that any one is more one than the other. Patterns fans might like to reconsider
Christopher Alexander's patterns in this light. For example, Light on Two Sides of
the Room is more a property and Attic Window more a strategy (Alexander 1977).
The book Design Patterns (Gamma 1995) contains strategiesit could as well have
been called Design Strategies. In Surviving Object-Oriented Projects, I decided to
call the appendix "Risk Reduction Strategies" instead of "Risk Reduction Patterns."
On the other hand, when we were writing Patterns for Effective Use Cases, we
deliberately searched for properties of effective use cases and use-case-writing
processes, rather than strategies.
When it came time to write this book, I tried describing the methodology with
patterns. However, they were an unsettling mix of properties and strategies. This is
not at all a problem for any one project teamthey only care about what they should
do themselves. It is problematic when aiming for a wide set of projects, because the
strategies should be the discretionary choices of the team. Therefore, I separated
the patterns into two chapters: Osmotic Communication and Frequent Delivery went
into Chapter 2, and Exploratory 360°, Walking Skeleton, and Incremental
Rearchitecture into Chapter 3. Reflection Workshop got split out as a technique, a
means to achieve the property Reflective Improvement.

The next issue involves the idiosyncrasies of the specific people who show up in the
specific buildings to work with specific technologies on the specific problem at hand.
This instance of people, project, and environment I refer to as the project
"ecosystem" (Cockburn 2002). Dealing with the ecosystem comes in two steps. The
first is to recognize that the properties have to be the heart of the matter, and
everything else advisory. Thus, Chapter 9 captures the visible properties (six to
eight people in one room or adjacent rooms, etc.) plus the properties the group sets
into place (Frequent Delivery, etc.). It doesn't mention the strategies, techniques,
process cycles, or work products. Instead, the group is required to periodically get
together and discuss together what its local conventions should be. When someone
with a strong personality joins or leaves, the group gets together again to revisit its
conventions.

The second part of dealing with the ecosystem is to recognize that a methodology
can't solve all of the group's problems. No methodology can correct for the absence
of competent and experienced people, or people who dislike each other, or can't
make a decision. These are simply exposures, and not just to Crystal Clear, but to
every methodology. It is quite possible that a group, otherwise following every
recommendation of Crystal Clear, will get together in their reflection workshop, have
an argument, and come out not being able to work with each other. That is outside
the reach of methodology.

What Crystal Clear can do is to name the rules that give a project team better than
even chances of success and room to maneuver.
QUESTION 4. WHAT IS THE SUMMARY SHEET FOR CRYSTAL
CLEAR?

Project     Up to 6 or possibly 8 colocated developers. Can be shaped with
size        care to up to 12 people. Not intended for larger teams, as it is
            missing group coordination.


System's    Loss of comfort or loss of discretionary moneys, as in invoicing
potential   systems. Can be shaped, with additional testing, verification,
for         and validation rules, up to "essential" moneys. Not intended for
damage      life-critical systems as it is missing verification of correctness.


Types of    Mainframe, client-server, Web-based, using any type database,
systems     central or distributed. Can be shaped for hard real-time
            systems with additional rules for planning and verification of
            system timing issues. Not intended for fail-safe systems, as it
            is missing hard architectural reviews for fault tolerance and
            fail-over.


The values Strong on communications, light on deliverables. Short, rich,
           informal communications paths, including with the sponsoring
           and user communities. Frequent deliveries with product and
           process feedback. Reduced overhead and fewer intermediate
           work products. Tolerance for variations in people's working
           styles.


Tolerances The policy standards are mandatory unless an equivalent
           substitution can be made. For example, use of the Scrum or
           Extreme Programming techniques for project scheduling and
           staging is acceptable; use of the TSP project launch and
           relaunch techniques is acceptable.

            Every deliverable has a designated owner or owners. "None"
            and "Everyone" are acceptable, if explicitly stated. In each of
            these cases, there must be additional justification as to how
            the model works (e.g., Extreme Programming declares that
            everyone owns all code when (and only when) they work in
            pairs; pair programming creates moment-to-moment dual
            ownership of code.)
Use of      Low precision at first, high precision only in delivered artifacts.
precision
            Low precision includes designers talking with users and
            sponsor, two-paragraph use cases or user stories or feature
            lists, design drawings on the whiteboard, user screens drawn
            as pencil sketches, release schedule as short lists and phrases
            (initially).

            High precision includes demo and production screens, final
            code, test cases, user manuals, or help text.
QUESTION 5. WHY THE DIFFERENT CHAPTER FORMATS?
Methodology books are generally written as a set of rules telling the reader what to
do. There are several reasons not to use that format in this book. The first is that
Crystal Clear is not so much a set of instructions about how to write software as
properties, conditions, conventions, and techniques regularly used to bring a certain
class of projects home safely (this is the safety priority). The intersection of those
successful projects is so small as to not be safe itself, and the union of all of them is
too fat. I am trying, in this book, to indicate how to find subsets that are both safe
and usable.

Readers come from various backgrounds, which makes a difference in what they
look for in the book. Our practice of programming has changed drastically since
1987 and the arrival of objects, and again since 1998, when the object and XP
communities brought patterns, refactoring, pair programming, and test-driven
development to the fore. Some programmers have kept up with the most recent
changes and need to see proper references to those latest practices. Others still
operate using the older practices and need to be given detail to catch up with the
latest vocabulary. Some readers, already experts at running small-team projects,
are looking for new ideas or new words for old ideas. Others, new to leading a small
team, want detailed instruction. Here are some of the categories of reader I tried to
deal with:

     Those arriving cold to the topic of agile development might benefit from the
     lighter and very contextual e-mail discussion in the first chapter.

     Those already very familiar with small-team agile development may want to
     focus only on the safety properties of the second chapter and use their own
     ways to get to those properties.

     Those getting started with a Crystal Clear way of working will want a starter
     set of techniques. Some of these techniques will be new, even to experienced
     people, things they can add to their practice set.

     Very few people coming from a traditional software development process
     history have an operational grasp of the cyclical development processes. Those
     with a process focus should benefit from seeing the process unrolled in the
     various ways, and the cycles isolated.

     Methodologists, and owners of development processes in general, operate
     directly from the list of work products, evaluating a methodology based on the
     list of who produces what and who checks that. The collection of work samples
     could still give an experienced agile developer some new ideas.

     Those coming to the book with a varied set of projects on their active list will
     want to know how to vary the rules and when to shift to a different
     methodology entirely.
     Those who have read widely will be interested in the economic and
     philosophical foundations and discussion of how these ideas fit with related
     and competing ones.

It is not my ambition that every reader should like every chapter and format.
Rather, my hope is that through the use of different perspectives, each reader,
coming from his particular background, can find some chapter format that conveys
what is needed in order to understand Crystal Clear's main ideas.
QUESTION 6. WHERE IS CRYSTAL CLEAR IN THE PANTHEON
OF METHODOLOGIES?
There are too many methodologies to compare against, so I'll address this question
by showing how I answer it and giving just two examples.

Each methodology author selects a couple of priorities to be the methodology's
focus or center of attention. That focus could be on defect reduction, as in
Cleanroom (Mills 1988) and the Dijkstra/Gries's program-derivation method (Gries
1981), repeatability as in ISO 9000, predictability and control as in the CMM(I), or
productivity as in XP. I have heard people discuss how to stay "laid back" as they
expand, indicating that as a priority. Whatever the author prioritizes becomes a filter
for selecting and rejecting possible elements of the methodology. Beware
methodology authors who assert that their methodology design satisfies all
priorities.

When comparing methodologies, investigators usually list the methodologies'
techniques and rules in a table, and let the readers evaluate the list according to
their (the readers') personal priorities. This presupposes that the reader already
understands the implications of priorities in methodology design. If the reader does
understand, then of course he can read the comparison and make a meaningful
choice. If not, however (and most readers don't know about methodology priorities),
there is an increased chance that the reader will select a methodology not aligned
with the team and organization's actual priority set.

Crystal, as a family of methodologies, focuses on efficiency and habitability as
critical elements of project safety. All Crystal methodologies try to accomplish as
much as possible with as little as possible. However, that drive for efficiency is
subject to the habitability imperative. Teams around the world have different
backgrounds and values and are faced with projects of differing characteristics and
priorities. The habitability priority is to give each team and each team member the
maximum free choice in working his own way (we want the team not only to
succeed, but also be willing to work in a similar way again).

Obviously, the two conflict at some point, and so Crystal allows for teams to choose
less-than-optimal ways of working if they so choose. As long as they keep delivering
software successfully, I am satisfied.[8]

  [8] This is, I believe, a fundamental difference between Crystal and XP.



Crystal Clear is the version of Crystal for small, colocated teams. It has the same
priorities and focus of attention, that is, being efficient and tolerant.

As a point of comparison, XP prioritizes for programmer productivity and code
evolvability (note: these are my interpretations). XP reduces intermediate work
products (increasing productivity) and raises the discipline required of the people
(increasing productivity again), but reduces tolerance for individual work styles. The
code should be refactored to become easier to evolve, and there is an extensive set
of unit tests to help the next person along.
Project sponsors requesting a development team to have ISO-9000 and CMM(I)
certification are focusing primarily on predictability and repeatability. Note that it is
not the methodology that gets assessed at the various CMM(I) levels, but the
organization itself. To pass certification, the organization needs a documented
methodology and that methodology should be designed in a way to facilitate getting
certified.

CMM(I), in particular, carries the concept that variation across projects can be
reduced through proper attention to statistical control of the process. For CMM(I)
Level-4 certification, the organization must show that it measures the process, and
for Level-5 certification that it uses the measurements to optimize the process.
(Crystal turns the CMM(I) pyramid upside down in a sense, but that discussion
belongs in a later question).

I don't know enough to answer what the focus of attention is for the Rational Unified
Process (Kruchten 1999), DSDM (Stapleton 2003), or Scrum (Scwaber 2002).

What priorities drive the selection of methodology elements in your organization?
When you understand that, you will be in a much better position to decide how to
choose or blend other methodologies.


Crystal Clear and XP

XP is similar to Crystal Clear in many ways, particularly with its attention to
colocation, short iterations, frequent delivery, and close contact with the sponsors
and end users. It is stricter than Crystal Clear in several ways and looser in a few.[9]

  [9] These comments are based on the 19982004 definition of XP. Kent Beck is busy changing the definition of XP, so the answers in this section may
  change over time. Use the same line of reasoning as shown to derive the up-to-date answers as XP evolves.



       XP's iteration cycles are required to be shorter: one day to one month. XP
       doesn't make any rules about how long the delivery cycle must be. This is the
       reverse of Crystal Clear, which requires deliveries to be no longer than three
       months at worst, but allows the iteration to be as long as the delivery. I have
       seen otherwise excellent XP projects get into trouble simply because the time
       to delivery was six months to a year. This is clearly a violation of the intent of
       XP, which was implicitly predicated upon frequent deliveries. To correct those
       situations, Crystal Clear is explicit about the need for real deliveries. My sense
       is that changing from annual to quarterly deliveries calls for the greatest
       mental shift in the organization, and once the organization gets to quarterly
       deliveries, it can see the purpose in shortening both the iteration and delivery
       cycles, and with the reflection workshops, can find a set that works for it.

       XP requires programming in pairs, which Crystal Clear doesn't. The difference
       is fundamental: XP aims to be the most effective methodology possible, and
       consequently reduces the degrees of freedom of the team in making these
       sorts of choices. Crystal Clear aims to be a tolerant and adequately effective
       methodology, giving the team as much freedom as possible in constructing the
       local set of conventions.
     XP requires automated unit testing with a rich set of automated unit tests, and
     integrations multiple times a day. The first is only a recommended property of
     Crystal Clear, and the integration period is allowed to vary significantly across
     projects.

     XP requires a customer on-site, where Crystal Clear only calls for easy access
     to expert users, with an indicated minimum of an hour a week rather than full
     time. This is a situation where more is better; for Crystal Clear I am
     deliberately looking for the minimum that satisfies the project safety priority.

     XP requires the team to decide and adhere to common coding conventions,
     something not required or even mentioned in Crystal Clear. XP's convention
     becomes understandable when one considers that the programmers change
     programming partners frequently and have to get to an agreement about
     coding conventions in order to avoid constant fights and confusion.

     XP talks explicitly about simplicity in design and refactoring as part of the
     development episode and also in the longer term. These are only
     recommended in Crystal Clear, as discussed in the strategies Walking Skeleton
     and Incremental Rearchitecture. While I am clearly in favor of simple designs
     with ongoing refactoring, the question is, Should it be a required standard in
     the methodology? My conclusion is that learning to simplify and refactor
     designs is part of the normal growth path of a professional programmer, and
     not something for Crystal Clear to attempt to legislate across all project types
     and programming technologies.

     XP does not require documentation and Crystal Clear does. In terms of the two
     goals of the cooperative game, XP is loud about its focus on the first goal,
     delivering the software, and silent on the second goal, setting up for the
     second goal.

     XP does provide half of the needed investment for the future: through pair-
     programming rotations, a new person joining a seasoned team can come up to
     speed on the design and code very quickly. However, as people move on to
     other projects over time, there is a leakage of team understanding, and it is
     quite likely that the newcomers will not master and internalize the knowledge
     as fast as it leaks out. This decay is almost inevitable, which means the team
     should create other, externalized informing markers, to support the influx of
     new people. Crystal Clear asks the team to deliberately perform both "greedy"
     and "investment" actions, balancing the longer term communication paths with
     the short term.

Looking at these, we see that where XP regulates, it regulates stricter rules, and
where it is looser, it is because of absence of a rule. This has two consequences:

     You are welcome to adopt any of XP's practices in Crystal Clear. This includes
     on-site customer, the planning game, programming in pairs, three-week
     iterations, test-first programming, fully automated unit tests, continuous
     integration, strict common coding conventions, and simple designs with
     ongoing refactoring.

     If you want to do full-on XP and still meet Crystal Clear, you must do two
     things: add a commitment to not just iterate, but also deliver code regularly;
     and add reminding and also informing documentation, as part of the
     investment activities involved in setting up for the next game.

From a techniques point of view, XP provides a rich library of effective techniques
for the professional developer to master.


Crystal Clear and Scrum

Scrum focuses on three key practices as well as the properties of close
communication and focus:

     Time-boxing. The subset of the requirements being developed during each
     one-month iteration is frozen into the "iteration backlog" at the beginning of
     the iteration. This gives the team the peace of mind (focus) to work on them
     without fear of them changing. Scrum requires a demo or equivalent after
     each time-box, not an actual delivery.

     Dynamic backlog. To compensate for locking the requirements during the
     iteration, a list ("product backlog") is kept of everything remaining to do. The
     sponsors are allowed to change the backlog however they wish, whenever
     they wish. The development team and the sponsors look at the backlog at the
     start of a new time-box period and select the subset to be frozen for the time-
     box. That is, they reprioritize the backlog before each iteration so each
     iteration targets the highest priority work each month.[10]

        [10] Jeff Sutherland is evolving "Continuous Scrum." Using automated planning and tracking tools, the contents of the time-box are allowed to
        vary daily, not just monthly (see http://wiki.scrums.org/index.cgi?ContinuousScrum). This requires a different approach to managing user
        relations and sponsor expectations. I look forward to his writings on this.



     Daily stand-up. The team meets briefly (literally standing up) each day to let
     each person announce what he worked on yesterday, is planning on working
     on today, and what is holding him back. This binds the team with social and
     technical interchange and creates an early warning system for when they get
     off track.

These combine well with the three key practices of Crystal:

     Frequent Deliveries, not merely demo-ing the system, but actually putting it in
     the hands of users, a "friendly user" at the minimum.

     Close Communication for Crystal in general, and Osmotic Communication for
     Crystal Clear, ease of question-and-answer at any time during the day, and
     overhearing of information in the small-team setting.

     Reflection Workshop, tuning of the rules to allow rapid adaptation to local
     conditions within the project time frame.

Scrum and Crystal fit neatly together, producing what one wit called the No-Process
process. The No-Process process says, roughly, start anywhere, work in short cycles
with high communication and reflective feedback, and eventually you will end up
with what you need (a genetic algorithm, if you like).

     Time-boxing with real deliveries is the motor to the process.

     Periodic reprioritization of the backlog keeps the product on track over the
     long term.

     Postiteration reflection workshops keep the team and process on track over
     the long term.

     Osmotic communication and daily stand-ups keep the team on track over the
     short term.

You can probably add the No-Process process to your organization's process, no
matter what that is. It would be a really wonderful genetic algorithm, except that
your project probably has a 4-, 6-, or 10-month deadline, and you don't have time
to start just anywhere and evolve to optimal. You need to start pretty close.

Crystal helps you start pretty close with its properties, principles, techniques, and
examples.


Crystal Clear and RUP

The Rational Unified Process (RUP) is very similar to the Crystal family of
methodologies in structure, but in a different way than XP.

Both RUP and Crystal are "methodology generators." Neither is a methodology or
process on its own (yes, I know it is called the Rational Unified Process but it is not
a process, anyway, it is a process generator, or "process framework" in RUP
language). Both RUP and Crystal are predicated upon the view that no single
process can fit all projects, and, therefore, the project team has to customize the
methodology to fit their local situation.

Both RUP and Crystal contain advice about how to custom-tailor the methodology to
the organization and project; both describe core techniques and contain work
product samples and templates. Both recommend incremental growth of the system
using iterative development, good testing practices, close contact to the users, risk
management, and feedback from running code.
RUP's inception phase is very similar to the chartering activity described in this
book. RUP's development cases for process customizing are just as core to RUP as
the methodology shaping workshop is to Crystal (if you aren't tuning RUP to your
company with development cases, then you aren't doing RUP just as if you don't do
methodology shaping and reflection workshops then you aren't doing Crystal).

At this level of discussion, there is very little to distinguish the RUP process
generator from the Crystal methodology generator.

Three core elements differ. RUP sets architecture, visual modeling, and tool usage as
core elements. Crystal considers architecture be a local matter, although I give the
same recommendation to build an early, executable architecture. Crystal differs
strongly from RUP on the subject of visual modeling, using first the idea that
documentation is to be a locally decided matter, and second the idea that
documentation should attempt to convey the "theory" of the system (see Question
1), and visual models are only a small part of conveying that theory. Crystal in
general is tool-agnostic, and Crystal Clear even somewhat reticent when it comes to
modeling tools. The ones that serve Crystal projects best tend to be configuation
management, communication, programming, test harness, test code-coverage, and
performance profiling tools.

Crystal contains one core practice that easily could be (and should be!) added to
RUP: the reflection workshop. There is nothing to stop every team using a RUP
instance from simply getting together after each iteration and reflecting on how to
do better. The RUP authors can (and should) simply add a technique and work
sample showing teams how to do some form of reflective improvement.

There are other differences, some of which are essential and some of which are
more mental associations about the methodology's practices and its "feel" in
practice. Those mental associations generate their own reality in organizations
adopting a methodology and so are not to be ignored.

     Light and Tolerant. Each Crystal methodology is intended, in its core values, to
     be as light, efficient, nonbureaucratic, and tolerant as the project situation will
     allow. Those are not declared elements of RUP. This gives the result that
     Andrea Branca described in an email: "It is possible to make any process look
     agile, but hard to make it feel agile."

     Shaping Principles. Crystal contains a set of principles (described in this
     chapter) intended to give guidance on how to make shaping choices. Those
     principles are part of the Crystal "package." RUP recommends tailoring and
     lists milestones and templates to tailor, but provides no theory about how to
     make the shaping choices (these can, of course, be added, building on the
     theory provided in Crystal).

     Speed of Methodology Shaping. Crystal calls for the methodology shaping to
     be done is very short order, usually on the order of days, so that cost of that
     workshop is repaid by the new efficiencies within the project time frame. A
     Crystal methodology is intended to evolve within the course of the project,
     which means that methodology shaping has to fast. Shaping RUP need not
     take months, but often does, which may be why so many companies avoid
     development cases and adopt the whole package (which is doubly bad,
     because they get the inefficiency of an untuned methodology with the cost
     penalty of an overly heavy one).

     Cut-down versus Buildup. The approach in Crystal is to start from whatever
     your team comes up with in the methodology shaping workshop, or whatever
     you used last time, and build up from there, adding to the methodology only
     when experience reveals a problem (typically during the reflection workshop).
     Crystal is deliberately underspecified, committing "errors of omission," if you
     will. The idea is that it is easier to detect when you are missing something you
     need than it is to detect that you have something extra you don't need.
     Crystal is deliberately "stretch to fit."

RUP, in contrast, is "shrink to fit." RUP contains an encyclopedia of work product
templates (among other contents). Just as you wouldn't read an encyclopedia from
front to back, or prepare all the recipes in The Joy of Cooking in sequential order,
you shouldn't fill in all the templates in the RUP encyclopedia from front to back.
Rather, just as you look into a cookbook or encyclopedia for what you need today,
you should look into the RUP encyclopedia and pull out the specific elements you
need on this particular project.

The approach in RUP, then, is to start from the full encyclopedia and throw things
out during the shaping activity. In this sense, it is overspecified.

The two err in different ways for different organizations. I expect groups to have
trouble with Crystal because it is too empty to start with; many have trouble with
RUP because it is too full to start with. I see no escape from a dilemma of this sort.

     Visual Modeling. As described earlier, visual modeling is a core element of RUP,
     where it is an elective element in Crystal.

     Tools. RUP is designed to be supported by tools, where Crystal is deliberately
     agnostic on tools, and even slightly against investment in visual modeling
     tools. My recommendation since 1992 has been to buy whatever tool lets you
     draw connected shapes the fastest; that includes pencil and paper,
     whiteboards and cameras, PowerPoint, Visio, and CAD-CAM tools (some of
     which, I am told, have outstanding usability).

     Concurrent Development. Crystal has concurrent development as a core
     recommendation, with guidance for incorporating just-in-time requirements
     when it suits your project. RUP contains recommendations for incremental
     growth of the system, but no guidance on how to incorporate just-in-time
     requirements and concurrent development.

     Corporate Support. There is no escaping the difference that RUP is supported
     by a dedicated design team, along with marketing, tools development,
     training, and consulting arms. This is not a difference in methodology
     definition, but it creates a very great difference in adoption. You can't buy a
     copy of Crystal; you can only buy a copy of two books (Agile Software
     Development and this one) and raid my Web site (Alistair.Cockburn.us). After
     that you and your team have to get together and think, discuss, and reflect.
     (Okay, for a very limited number of teams, a Crystal methodology expert can
     be hired to do some coaching.) That is very different from placing an order for
     books, tools, courses, and consulting to show up at your organization's
     doorstep.

Can you do Crystal Clear within RUP? Would Crystal Clear be a valid implementation
of RUP, assuming of course a colocated team of three to eight people?

Recall that only the first three properties of Crystal Clear are mandatory. Everything
else is advisory or at least up for discussion. Those three properties are not
conceptually difficult; the question is whether a team doing RUP will actually bring
themselves to deliver to a real user every few months, whether the team will move
from their private offices to a common area to get osmotic communication, and
whether they will sit down, discuss in a reflection workshop and achieve reflective
improvement. If they can do these three things, then probably the rest of what they
do will fall within Crystal Clear.

It is not obvious to me that Crystal Clear, as written, is a valid implementation of
RUP. There may not be enough visual modeling or architecture done or explicit risk
management to pass the RUP test. Whether it does or doesn't probably depends on
how your development cases come out.
QUESTION 7. WHAT ABOUT THE CMM(I)?[11]
  [11] CMMI is broader in scope and more flexible than the "CMM for Software." Indeed, the CMM for Software is no longer officially supported. For the
  purposes of this discussion, though, there is no significant difference between CMM and CMMI.



Crystal Clear was not designed with the intention of meeting requirements of the
CMM(I), and it is difficult see how it would move up that ladder. Crystal Clear does
address many of the activities called out in the CMM(I), although perhaps not in the
way the standard CMM(I) assessor is used to. However, Crystal Clear has a project
focus, and the CMM(I) has an organizational focus.

On the other hand, many organizations already certified at CMM(I) level 3 or above
should be able to either introduce Crystal Clear or borrow from it to increase
efficiency. Let's look at that closer by imagining an organization already doing
software development at level 3 of the CMM(I) and wanting to use Crystal Clear.

       They have to find a "friendly" user willing to let them deploy the system every
       few months. This should violate none of their process rules. However, the
       groups I have encountered that prioritize CMM(I) certification have put their
       developers so far away from the users and burdened their process so much
       that it is unlikely that they can deliver running, tested software every quarter.

       They have to colocate the team to get osmotic communication. This should
       break no process rules. However, many CMM(I) organizations are committed
       to distributed teams.

       They have to adopt reflective improvement. It should violate no process rules
       that people get together and look for ways of working better. The trouble it
       may cause is that the team is likely to suggest process changes. Many
       organizations who have gone to the trouble to get CMM(I) certified did not
       leave room for the process to change. The shift to an evolving process, though
       difficult, will be a healthy one.

In all three cases, the needed change is not in the process rules, but in mind-set
(the harder of the two to change).

Attending to focus, personal safety, and easy access to expert, users should not
jeopardize any part of their declared process, but only help the people work better.
Similarly, the technical environment with automated testing, configuration
management, and frequent integration may take some work, but shouldn't interfere
in any way with the certified process.

The work products of Crystal Clear are advisory to start with, and the organization
certified at level 3 is likely to have all of the ones I name (and others besides). The
organization might adopt some of the ideas shown in the work products section to
simplify or improve their work product set (replacing the Gantt schedule charts with
earned-value or burn-up charts would be a good start).
There are several other differences between Crystal and the CMM(I). The most
obvious is that the CMM(I) is hosted and supported by a sizable organization that
acts as a resource for training and examination, while Crystal is supported by three
books and a handful of expert consultants around the world. Even though with good
luck Crystal will get more support, it is unlikely ever to have organizational support
at the same level as the Software Engineering Institute (if it did, it would have to be
called the Software Gamesmanship Institute!).

The real core of the differences comes from the underlying values and assumptions
about software development. The CMM(I) is fundamentally about consistency,
predictability, and repeatability. Crystal is fundamentally about efficiency,
habitability, and locally optimized rule sets.

Process engineering literature categorizes processes as either defined/theoretical
(not the CMM(I) meaning of "defined" I hasten to add!) or empirical. A
defined/theoretical process is one that is well enough understand to be automated.
An empirical one needs human examination and intervention. A textbook in the field
has this to say:

  It is typical to adopt the defined (theoretical) modeling approach when the
  underlying mechanisms by which a process operates are reasonably well
  understood. When the process is too complicated for the defined approach, the
  empirical approach is the appropriate choice. (Ogunnaike 1992)

To pull off a defined/theoretical process, one must know and be able to adequately
measure all the relevant parameters, but more significantly, the system must be
nonchaotic. In a chaotic system, even the slightest perturbation in a key parameter
sends the system off in a different direction; no amount of measurement and
control is enough. The CMM(I) ladder is built on the assumption that these
conditions are met.

Personally, I doubt that either the first or the last assumption is met in software
development. First, I don't think we know the relevant parameters to measure.
Second, I think it quite likely that any team-based creative activity is chaotic,
meaning that a tiny perturbation can cause an arbitrarily large effect. Here is a short
example from a meeting I attended:

  In a meeting about a new initiative, the people in the room were tense, but
  seemingly well-behaved. When we took a short break, the woman who was to
  lead the new initiative turned in her resignation! It seems that one of the (to
  me) mildly phrased barbs offered by the future CFO was simply "one too
  much" for her, and she quit on the spot.

Think of the last time that you made what you thought was an innocuous comment
and your listener got surprisingly upset. Think of when a key person missed a
meeting. Either of those can cascade into an arbitrarily large consequence for the
project.

The need to have people detecting things going wrong and intervene in unexpected
ways was driven home to me in an e-mail from Glen Alleman, reporting on an
organization (CH2M HILL Communication and Information Solutions), which
provides nuclear material stewardship applications, ERP, cyber security, and other
services to several thousand users under the guidelines of the Defense Nuclear
Facilities Safety Board (which controls thousands of buildings contaminated with
chemical and radioactive waste). Glen wrote

  We've just come from a "safety stand down," (there's always some safety
  issue with our business including the IT part). In the lessons learned process
  one of the questions is, "If you followed the procedure correctly would the
  problem not have occurred?"The answer from the safety guys is
  essentiallythere are empirical processes that must be present.

This single question allows the organization to detect new, previously unsuspected
parameters of importance. At any level of accomplishment, a team should have the
humility and healthy skepticism to ask this question and follow where it leads.

For the above reasons, I find it unlikely that the issue will ever seriously arise of a
CMM(I) level-3 organization doing Crystal Clear, although a CMM(I)-certified group
may borrow ideas from Crystal Clear.


This is the time to explain what I meant in the previous section by Crystal turning
the CMM(I) pyramid upside down.

Crystal is built on the concept that every methodology and organization needs to be
self-evolving. What the CMM(I) places at the top level, optimizing, I have as a
starting requirement. Every Crystal project uses reflective improvement,
guaranteeing that the rules will change over time. If Crystal were to have a
certification activity, then even at "Crystal level 2," the team would have to show
that they changed their process within and across projects!

There is a less distinct inversion of the pyramid, having to do with measurement
precision. In order to step into statistical process control, the CMM(I) calls for
numerical measurements to take place at level 4. The concept I find missing in this
approach to measurement is the idea of making the measurements more precise at
higher levels, starting off with "fuzzy measures" that are nothing more than
adjectives or expressions of feelings.

When a person says in a reflection workshop or status meeting, "that went well,"
"I'm not comfortable," "I didn't like," "I'm not completely certain," or "there was a
wobbliness at the start," he is offering up the integrated response of a professional
who has been in many situations in their lives. It is a rolling up of a lot of
information gathered from a number of sources, into a single expression. It is a
"fuzzy number" in the mathematical sense (McNeill 1994), occupying a range of
values with a probability distribution function.

These are great measurement values for many situations, particularly when the
important parameters are numerous or unknown, as with a software development
project.
The pyramid that would be interesting to me would start with personal, fuzzy
measurements of the project at the lower levels. Most projects would benefit greatly
from recording and analyzing them. As the organization progresses, they might
learn which ones are more significant to track, and find ways to sharpen the
measurement value, making it more precise, eventually ending up with numbers
(which I consider sharp, pointy things when applied to such things as project
mood).
QUESTION 8. WHAT ABOUT UML AND ARCHITECTURE?
The Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a drawing notation standard, not a
methodology. In terms of the standard methodology framework (roles, techniques,
standards, milestones, etc.), it is one of the standards for one or two of the roles. It
is a component of a methodology, but not likely to be a very large factor in the
project's outcome.

The UML standard does not make prescriptions or even recommendations about
when, where, and how much you draw. With respect to the standard, you can draw
out the entire design before starting to program, or you can "think a little, draw a
little, code a little," a strategy long recommended by object technology experts and
supported by Scott Ambler's (2002) book, Agile Modeling.

Discussion of drawing models quickly gets caught up in discussion of architecture
and how much design to do when. You will not be surprised to learn that my view is
that different people have different preferences and like to think about designs for
different amounts of time before starting to program.

Having said that, it is also my view that a design is a "theory," which desperately
needs a matching "experiment" to validate it, or, more importantly, reveal its
weaknesses. Usually, the design doesn't survive its first encounter with real code.
This means that the sooner the design gets tested in implementation, the sooner
the designer learns where and how it needs improvement.

Some people have a very short thinking time horizon before they desperately feel
the need for an experiment: on the order of five or ten minutes. Others have a
medium time horizon, on the order of several hours or a day or two, during which
they mentally explore all the pitfalls, weaknesses, and potential change requests
they may have to adapt to. Others have quite long thinking time horizons, on the
order of a week or two, during which they do the same. My experience is that when
designers spend more than a few weeks working out a (software) design, they
usually have passed the optimal trade-off point, where it would have been useful to
create an experiment with real code to get some real feedback.[12]

  [12] I did hear one story of a programmer assigned to program an operating system kernel element, who stared at his design for months, studying its
  symmetry and aesthetics, until he was totally convinced no symmetry was missing and it couldn't be made simpler, at which point he typed it in (and it
  worked). Such a situation is extremely rare.



Taking all those together, I feel that most architects take too long before they make
their first experiment, but it is not necessary to adopt the view that design can be
replaced just by refactoring and attention to XP's "once and only once" rule.

The subjects of UML, drawings, tools, architectural design, and thinking time
horizons tend to get confused all together. If you can pull them apart, it frees you
up to work in new combinations.

It is, for example, not the case that all drawings are UML drawings (see the work
products for some examples), nor must architectures be described in UML, or even
in drawings, nor must fancy software tools be used to capture either drawings or
UML (imagine UML drawn by hand, see the work products for examples), nor does
spending time thinking mean sitting at a tool. Finally, and especially, nor is it the
case that sitting in front of a UML drawing tool means that any architectural thinking
is going on.

The approach typical on a Crystal Clear project is to use the Walking Skeleton and
Incremental Rearchitecture strategies. An early architecture is sketched,
programmed and tested in the first iteration, and completed, extended and evolved
over subsequent iterations. UML might or might not be used to think through it and
document the result.
QUESTION 9. WHY AIM ONLY FOR THE SAFETY ZONE? CAN'T
WE DO BETTER?
Yes, you can do better, and if you're up for it, I encourage you to do so. For
example, you can apply all of the XP practices, with test-driven development, full-
time pair programming in rotations, automated acceptance tests as well as unit
tests, expert users and domain experts on-site full time, continuous and automated
builds, shortening the iteration cycle to one or two weeks, and delivering monthly.

You can, and should, if at all possible, institute a weekly one-hour discussion group.
People who have done this report back on the increase in trust, capability, and
ability of people to discuss their topics with each other. Work your way through
several books, including The Pragmatic Programmer (Hunt 2001), books on test-
driven design (Beck 2003, Astels 2004), refactoring (Fowler 2002) and any number
of the design pattern books. In these sessions, show and discuss snippets of code
from the project, learning to analyze and compare design-programming techniques.
Discuss ways of testing code. Use the sessions to try out new languages and tools.

You can and should pay extra attention to personal safety, and build the basis for
trust between peopletechnical as well as personal trust. You can and should allocate
time and money for professional training of the team members, so they stay up to
date with our fast moving field. For example, I have totally revised my programming
techniques every ten yearsI am on my fourth relearning cycle, and that is only for
the programming. I haven't even touched usability or user interface design yet, and
am woefully out of date on configuration management systems. Where are you? If
you haven't significantly changed your habits for design, programming, UI design,
and testing in the last five or seven years, you are almost certainly far out of date.

The list of how to do better than what I have required in Crystal Clear is long.
However, each of those things adds difficulty in adoption, and reduces the number
of people who can manage the sum total.

The Crystal family of methodologies is not targeted to be "optimal" for any one
dimension of possible project priorities. It does not optimize for productivity, or for
traceability, legal liability, freedom from defects, being laid back, distributed teams,
maximum use of junior staff, or any of the other priorities you come up with.

Crystal has as priorities: project safety, efficiency, and habitability. The efficiency
priority says, play the economic-cooperative game well, allowing good speed of
delivery on this game while still paying attention to the next game. The habitability
priority says, take into account the natural strengths and weaknesses of humans
working together to make the result reasonably pleasant to live in. Project safety
means that software comes out the door in a fair time frame, with the project staff
intact and willing to go through the same process again.

The efficiency and habitability priorities conflict, as do so many issues that we must
attend to in software development. One can be more efficient by being less tolerant.
One can be more tolerant by requiring less efficiency.
Hopefully, this book provides enough rigor for your team to get into the project's
safety zone, and enough latitude so that you can add whatever next priority you
need in your projects.
QUESTION 10. WHAT ABOUT DISTRIBUTED TEAMS?
This is a much more interesting question now than it was when I first formulated
Crystal Clear.

Crystal Clear is predicated on having osmotic communication. It takes me about six
seconds to push my chair away, walk out of the office to an office down and across
the hall, and stick my head in to ask the person a question.

In another six seconds, I can discover the person isn't there and get back to my
workstation and keep working without losing my train of thought. Or ask the
question, face to face. The point is to limit the amount of time and energy used to
get the question placed and have a short, rich conversation about it.

Richard Herring reported on an experiment in which the team, sitting on different
floors of the same building, used microphones and Web cameras to simulate
"presence and awareness" (Herring 2001). Each person put the web cam photo of
each other person as small images on their workstations. With these small images,
they could each see whether the other person was busy with heads-down typing, in
discussion, or absent. With the microphones and speakers, they could ask and
answer questions immediately. Using chat technology, they could ask and answer
questions silently and asynchronously (reducing the disturbance factor even more).
They even copied code to and from their development environment, so they could
exchange real code and not just suggestions about it.

Richard Herring satisfied my concerns about osmotic communication, and it is clear
that his group took care of their social personal safety and trust issues as well. This
was a very creative manner to deal with one of the "sweet spots" (see the first
section in this chapter for a discussion of the sweet spots and simulating them). If
you have an only mildly distributed team, try Herring's ideas.

Victoria Einarsson, in Sweden, described using something essentially like Crystal
Clear, except that the developers worked out of their homes. Victoria described to
me how she spent hours each day on the phone, asking and answering questions
and keeping the social connections in place. Several things became clear during our
conversation. First, they were indeed effective as a team. Second, they mimicked
Crystal Clear in almost every aspect. Third, it wasn't actually Crystal Clear because
they didn't have osmotic communication. Fourth, their success was heavily
dependent on Victoria's tremendous social-technical skills as the team leader. In
other words, if they wanted to set up a second project team, they would have to be
very careful in interviewing the new group leader for having outstanding social and
technical skills. They were successful, but it is not a project setup I would easily
recommend, because it was so dependent on Victoria's skills.

The success of this team raises a relevant point. It is not the case that you have to
do everything in Crystal Clear to be successful. A number of teams I visit are
successful while dropping elements of Crystal Clear. They operate outside of the
general safety zone that Crystal Clear describes, and make up for that by having
some outstanding people in key positions on the team. Having such people is also a
way to win the game, just not the subject of this particular book.

Teams distributed across more than just one city are more dependent on
communication technology and outstanding individuals. There are ways for them to
succeed, but those ways aren't Crystal Clear.
QUESTION 11. WHAT ABOUT LARGER TEAMS?
I had the pleasure of visiting and interviewing Jan Siric, then of Nordea in Denmark,
about his sixteen-person project, which matched all the characteristics of Crystal
Clear except for team size. Here's what I saw:

  The twelve developers, programming both mainframe and workstation
  software, sat at three long tables, two per side of each long table. Each table
  had a workstation at each end. The center section of each table was a
  whiteboard lying on its side. The monitors were mounted on rails so they could
  slide into the center section. Jan and three other team leader/manager people
  sat at tables to the side. A long conference table lay further down the room.
  The room was airy, spacious, and filled with plants. I immediately noticed the
  presence of carpeting on the floor and acoustic tile on the ceiling to dampen
  the noise. As a result, noise was not a problem.

With this arrangement, Jan was able to get the six-second timing even with sixteen
people, and people could work alone, in pairs, in clusters or as a group as they
needed.

What impressed me the most, however, was Jan's ability to detect cracks in the
communication. Hearing an odd comment in the cafeteria one day, he interviewed
the programmers and found that a mainframe programmer who had only recently
joined their team hadn't fully adjusted to their open conversations with frequent
questions and interactions. Jan rearranged the seating, swapped the team managers
so that the one with the best social and communications skills was in charge of that
particular subteam, and then paid special attention to how the interactions
proceeded.

Jan's actions perfectly illustrate Crystal Clear's concept of judging the state of the
project in good measure by the quality of the communications.

However, I would not recommend Crystal Clear for teams of sixteen people as a
general rule. Jan was able to pull it off because he was outstanding at the
social/communication issues involved, and he was able to get both osmotic
communication and personal safety in place with that particular team.

Under common circumstances, osmotic communication is very hard to achieve with
more than about eight people. XP groups can achieve it with twelve people, using
six workstations and two people per workstation. After that, it gets quite difficult.

Crystal Clear is not intended to scale. It is an efficient way to work when you can
achieve colocation and osmotic communication. If you can't achieve that sweet spot,
then you have to work differently.
QUESTION 12. WHAT ABOUT FIXED-PRICE AND FIXED-SCOPE
PROJECTS?
There is a tendency to think that agile processes only apply to exploratory projects.
This is simply not true. All of my early experiences were on fixed-scope projects. I
started using these techniques simply because there was no other way to meet the
project deadline than to be superefficient as these ideas permit one to be. You
should be able to use these, or adaptations of these techniques, on almost any
small project (many of the strategies and techniques can be used or adapted for
almost any project).

Let's see how blitz planning adjusts for fixed-time and fixed-scope projects.

The fixed-time project. You lay out the cards on the table and walk through the
tasks and timing. The answer comes out larger than the time allowed in the fixed-
time schedule. One of two things may happen

     You and your executive sponsor get creative with the cards and find a way to
     meet the deadline.

     Despite all your creativity, you can't find a way to meet the timeline.

The first situation shows a good application of the blitz planning technique. It is
possible that the technique allowed you to find a strategy that you might otherwise
have overlooked.

The second situation does not show a failure in blitz planning, Crystal Clear, or agile
techniques. It shows that someone made a wrong bid on the project. Whether you
can convince the sponsors to change the bid depends on factors local to your
situation. The result may in fact be that you have to live with the given schedule
and simply work overtime. The difference is that everyone in the room knows the
situation early.

  On one project we went and got the customer-side sponsor and showed him
  the cards. After working with the cards, he agreed that the project simply
  couldn't be done in the time given, and changed the terms of the project. I
  can only hope that you are so fortunate.

The fixed-scope project. You are starting the second, third, or fourth iteration. You
lay out the cards on the table, and . . . you don't change the scope of the project!
There is nothing in agile development that says you have to change the
requirements in each iteration. Crystal Clear and XP say that if you are in a situation
where you need to change scope, this is the time and manner in which to do it. For
the fixed-scope situation, you simply leave the scope alone.
QUESTION 13. HOW CAN I RATE HOW "AGILE" OR HOW
"CRYSTAL" WE ARE?
Proponents of agile development dread being asked how to evaluate how "agile" a
project team is. Nonetheless, the manager of a portfolio of projects will want to
track how the teams adopt elements of Crystal Clear. Figure 7-5 shows how I
answered the question for a series of projects.

     We characterized each project by how many people were being coordinated
     and the iteration length.

     We listed the properties, starting with the seven properties from Chapter 2.
     We unpacked them to expose their components. Thus, user viewings,
     automated testing, configuration management, integration frequency, and
     collaboration across boundaries become separate tracking items.

     We identified which strategies and techniques might be interesting to try. In
     Figure 7-5, I show a dozen worth considering.



   Figure 7-5. way to track projects' use of the agile ideas.


Project                 SOL        EVA         GS          THT     Ideal


# People           25         16         6           2           <30


Iteration Length   1 month    3 weeks    1 month     1 month     <2 months


Frequent           1 year!    1 year!    1 month     4 months! <3 months
Delivery


User Viewings      1 week     1 year!    1 month     1 month     <1 month


Reflection         1 month    3 weeks    0           1 month     <1 month
Workshops


Osmotic       1 floor         yes        yes         yes         yes
Communication
Project                SOL       EVA         GS           THT     Ideal


Personal Safety yes          1/2       yes          yes         yes


Focus            yes         yes       priorities   yes         yes
(priorities,
time)


Easy Access to   1        0            0            yes         yes
Expert Users     day/week


Configuration    yes         yes       yes          yes         yes
Management


Automated        0           unit      0            unit        yes
Testing


Frequent         3/week      daily     1/week       1/day       continuous
Integration


Collaboration    yes         0         0            1/2         yes
across
Boundaries


Exploratory 360° yes         0         0            yes         yes


Early Victory    yes         yes       0            yes         yes


Walking Skeleton yes         yes       0            yes         yes


Incremental      yes         yes       0            yes         yes
Rearchitecture


Information      yes         yes       yes          yes         yes
Radiators


Pair Programming 0           yes       0            0           maybe
Project                  SOL       EVA          GS          THT      Ideal


Side-by-Side       0           0          0           0           maybe
Programming


Test-First         0           yes        0           0           maybe
Development


Blitz Planning     yes         yes        0           yes         yes


Daily Stand-up     yes         yes        yes         0           yes
Meeting


Burn Charts        yes         0          0           yes         yes


Dynamic Priority   0           yes        0           yes         maybe
Lists




We filled out this table, marking how frequently the deliveries, the reflection
workshops, the viewings, and the integrations had happened. Osmotic
communication got a 'Yes' if the people were in the same room, otherwise we wrote
down the team's spread. Personal safety got '0,' '1/2,' or 'Yes,' depending on a
subjective rating. (If you don't have personal safety on your projects, can you post
a '0'?)

For focus, we put down "priorities" if that was achieved, "time" if that was achieved,
or 'Yes' if both were achieved. For automated testing, we considered unit and
acceptance testing separately (none had automated acceptance testing).

We marked some of the times with '!' if they seemed out of range. Seeing a '!' in
one place leads me to look for a compensating mechanism in another part of the
chart. For example, both SOL and EVA had only one delivery, after a year. Both
received '!' marks by that delivery frequency. However, SOL has a compensating
mechanism, a user viewing every week (marked in bold in the table). EVA, the only
project in this chart that crashed and burned, has no compensating mechanism (this
is a good time to reread the property, "Easy Access to Expert Users.")

The table in Figure 7-5 does not yield a summary score. Instead, it indicates what
the team might choose to work on next. I would, of course, post the chart as an
information radiator.
QUESTION 14. HOW DO I GET STARTED?
Do these four things immediately:

  1. Review the constraints for Crystal Clear (the June 9 e-mail from Crystal to
     Alistair). If you can't meet these constraints, go ahead and continue with the
     next steps, but bear in mind you will need additional rules or practices to
     compensate for the missing project characteristics.

  2. Hold a practice reflection workshop with a few friendly colleagues (this is a
     process miniature for the reflection workshop).

  3. Proceed through the project interviews and proper team reflection workshop
     as described in the techniques section. In that reflection workshop, walk
     through this book's description of process cycles, and the work products.
     Review the team structure and conventions work product, in particular.

  4. Identify who will serve as the "friendly user" to your group, to review your
     system as it grows, before it becomes something you can deploy to all users.

After these steps, you should have discussed what it means to be doing Crystal
Clear, where your team's strengths lie, and where the team and project's weak
spots lie. You will naturally have discussed automated tests, configuration
management, frequent integration, and ways to attain focus. It will take some time
for personal safety to be established.

  5. Run a short iteration. Make it artificially short, one or two weeks, so that you
     can hold your first reflection workshop right away and revise your working
     habits already (this short iteration provides you with a process miniature on
     Crystal Clear itself). It will also cement the reflection workshop as a group
     technique, provide an outlet for questions and ideas, and increase personal
     safety (people will see how their actions are interpreted).

At this point, you are underway. Use this and other books as encyclopedias of ideas
to try during successive iterations. Finally,

  6. Hold reflection workshops every two weeks for a month or two, and then
     decide on the interval to use between the next reflection workshops.

There. You are doing Crystal Clear.
Chapter 8. Tested (A Case Study)
Stephen Sykes of Thales Research and Technology in the United Kingdom
experimented with an early version of this book and tried it out. Here is his report
on the experience, along with the ISO 9001 auditor's recommendations. Many
thanks to both Stephen and Thales.

It is a rare treat to be able to include in this book a field report from someone who
tried Crystal Clear. It is an even greater treat to read the report of the ISO 9001
auditor who analyzed their project.

Thales Research and Technology UK is an ISO 9001 certified organization. Wanting
to know more about Agile development as part of their corporate process
improvement activity, they decided to try Crystal Clear on a program for calibrating
the camera position for a natural scene recognition system. Stephen Sykes, the
initial lead designer for the project, downloaded and worked an early (2002) version
of this book for that experiment. The concluding part of the experiment was to have
one of their ISO 9001 auditors analyze the project for what should be done
differently for when it wouldn't be an experiment.

The top priority for the project team was to complete the prototype by the end of
January 2004. The ideal would be to have a deliverable-quality product. In fact, they
ended up with a good-quality demonstrator that could be turned into a product at
reasonably short notice. The sponsor terminated the project at that point, electing
to drop from the project scope the trial of a second calibration algorithm and certain
project documentation activities.

The ISO auditor noted the difference between the final project scope and the
original with the description: "[T]he project was unfortunately terminated early.
However, due to the nature of the CC method, the early termination did not prohibit
a useful software product."

In terms of Crystal Clear's attention to the sponsor's priorities, this counts as a
satisfactory project outcome ("at the last reflection workshop, the sponsor also said
that the advantages greatly outweighed the disadvantages. He's suggested we try it
again, on a larger project, provided the fit with our existing procedures can be
resolved"). The methodology has become classified as an allowable candidate for
projects in the "rapid application development" category, and is slated to be used
again in the near future.

Here is the report, trimmed to fit within this chapter.
THE FIELD REPORT

Executive Summary

This report describes a pilot project using the Crystal Clear methodology. The report
represents part of a body of knowledge about Agile methodologies built at Thales
Research and Technology (TRT UK), as part of its Small Systems Software
Engineering activity. Crystal Clear itself was developed by the methodologist Alistair
Cockburn.

Crystal Clear is an Agile methodology. "Agile" is an umbrella term for methodologies
such as XP, DSDM, and Scrum. In general, Agile methodologies aim to reduce the
risk of building the wrong thing, and to deliver value as early as possible. A
literature survey of the Agile methodologies was conducted during 2003, and it was
decided that Crystal Clear was the one most likely to be useful at Thales.[1] Crystal
Clear was selected because it emphasizes

  [1] This was Stephen's view. It is not a corporate Thales position.




       Efficiency. Crystal Clear aims to minimize waste, while focusing the team on
       the important features.

       Habitability. Crystal Clear is designed to be comfortable to use, so that
       teams do not feel a need to avoid following it.

       Safety. The methodology aims to increase the probability of successful
       delivery.

Crystal Clear is intended for small, low-criticality projects. Compared with XP (which
is the most well-known Agile methodology), Crystal Clear is more tolerant of
individuals' different ways of working, but includes stronger planning activities.

We ran a pilot project in order to evaluate the methodology. We aimed to test the
methodology against the claims made for it, and to determine any issues that might
prevent adoption. Project CamCal was chosen as the pilot because it was small and
noncritical (which is the kind of project the methodology was designed for), and
because its members were willing to be part of the trial. Unfortunately, the project
was halted before its planned end date, for reasons outside the scope of the pilot
project. The project still succeeded in delivering a product to the satisfaction of its
customers.

Our conclusions are summarized as follows. The methodology met its objectives of
being efficient, habitable, and safe:

       Efficiency. Performance metrics showed high productivity.
     Habitability. The team would be happy to use the methodology again.

     Safety. The project was converging on its agreed end date until it was
     curtailed. The project still created a usable product.

The following issues need attention in adopting the methodology:

     It may require established roles to change.

     It challenges established documentation practices.

     It requires a broadly scoped contract.

The TRT UK Quality Assurance team conducted an informal assessment of the
project from the perspective of ISO 9001 and TickIT, concluding that the
methodology could be made compliant with these standards with the addition of a
few extra practices and records. The QA team proposed that Crystal Clear be
incorporated into the Quality Management System at TRT UK and proposed further
studies using the methodology.

An analysis of the methodology from the CMMI perspective is ongoing at the time of
writing. We aim to trial the methodology on a project with more developers.


Introduction

The project developed a program for use in connection with a computer vision
system called ZYX. Our pilot project, CamCal, developed a camera calibration tool
for ZYX. The purpose of camera calibration is to inform ZYX of where the camera is
and where it is pointing. This information is encoded in a calibration matrix that
maps 3D world coordinates to 2D image coordinates. The matrix is needed by ZYX
in order to understand what it sees.

The starting point was a prototype camera calibration tool that had previously been
developed in MATLAB. The purpose of the project was to replace the prototype with
something less fragile and more suitable for presenting to customers, and more
suitable for use at customer sites. We decided to write our new version in Java, with
some of the mathematical components implemented in MATLAB.

CamCal was a small project, with only one and one-half developers and a total cost
of just over six man months. The work was funded internally by TRT UK, and there
was no immediate external customer.


Project Chronology

The key dates on the project are shown in Figure 8-2. In order to keep this section
reasonably short, we present only the most significant events on the project. These
include events where there was a change to the requirements or to the schedule.


  Figure 8-2. Project chronology. (Note the use of European date
                       format [dd/mm/yy].)

                               [View full size image]




The project involved the following people. With the exception of Stephen, who is the
author of this document, their names have been changed.
       Sam, the project manager in charge of the wider project of which CamCal was
       a part

       Liam, a computer vision consultant

       Stephen, an engineer with a programming/algorithms background

       Desmond, an engineer with a Java background


Liam's Prototype

Liam conceived the idea of a camera calibration tool. He wrote a prototype, mostly
in his own time. The prototype included all the key features required, but it was
fragile and not particularly easy to use. What was needed was a tool written to
professional standards that we could deliver to customers.


Proposal

Sam and Liam began work on a proposal for a camera calibration project. They
would need at least one software engineer. Stephen would be released to work on
the camera calibration project on a part-time basis, provided the project used an
Agile methodology.

A proposal document was written that laid out the project's initial requirements, the
development approach, an initial work breakdown structure, and an estimate for the
work. The estimate was for 105 days of effort. The initial allocation of roles was that
shown in Figure 8-1.



                Figure 8-1. Initial allocation of roles.


Name                 Roles


Sam                  Sponsor


Stephen              Lead Designer, Coordinator, Writer, Tester


Liam                 User, Designer, Business Expert, Writer, Tester
The proposal document was put to Senior Management and accepted. The project
started on August 18, 2003.

The proposal document was based on an early (January 2002) version of Crystal
Clear. This did not include project start-up activities. But it was clear that there were
issues we needed to resolve before we could begin the iterative development. So,
we borrowed the idea of an "Exploration phase" from XP. This was the first phase of
the project and is described in Figure 8-2.


Exploration

The Exploration phase was a two-week long task in which Stephen and Liam
captured more detailed requirements, investigated the key technical issues, and
firmed up the estimates.[2]

  [2] Readers will recognize this as similar to the Exploratory 360B0 strategy described in Chapter 3.



The proposal document gave a set of high-level requirements, but more detail was
needed. Stephen and Liam worked together to flesh out the details, with Liam (as
user) being the main source of requirements. They captured the requirements using
a printing whiteboard, drawing several draft screen-shots such as the one in Figure
8-3.


                         Figure 8-3. An example whiteboard printout.
The printouts were numbered and kept together in a folder (the printout in Figure 8-
3 is number 10). They also started a requirements document.

The proposal document had left open the issue of which language the software was
to be written in. This needed to be resolved quickly because it affected the
composition of the team. After some investigation it was decided to use Java for the
GUI and MATLAB for the underlying mathematics. The MATLAB source-code would
be compiled into a DLL compatible with the Java Native Interface.

Crystal Clear expects at least one team member who is thoroughly familiar with the
technology, but neither Liam nor Stephen had used Java before. So we asked for
another team member, and received Desmond, a strong Java developer. Desmond
relocated to sit with Liam and Stephen in the same bay.

At the end of the Exploration phase, the project roles were as shown in Figure 8-4.
Desmond was allocated to the project 100 percent. Stephen had a commitment to
another project so was allocated 50 percent. The other team members were called
in when necessary. Stephen is shown as lead designer because that was the original
plan. But Desmond had the more relevant skill set, and it was clear that he would
lead the development work once he was up to speed with the project.



         Figure 8-4. Project roles at end of exploration.


Name                 Background (partial) Role(s)


Sam                  Project Manager          Sponsor


Liam                 Technical Consultant     User, Business Expert, Writer,
                                              Tester


Stephen (50%)        Software engineer,       Lead Designer, Coordinator,
                     engineering maths        Writer, Tester


Desmond (100%) Software engineer (Java Designer, Tester
               expert)




First Planning Meeting

We conducted a planning meeting using the project planning jam session technique
suggested in CC. Sam, Desmond, and Stephen sat round a table and contributed
task cards. An example task card is shown in Figure 8-5. Each task card had a title,
a brief description, the name of the person, and an estimate in man days. The
description did not need to be very long, nor understandable to anybody outside the
project. The estimate was in the top right-hand corner in man days. The team
adopted the convention that the estimate included any associated unit testing effort.


                     Figure 8-5. An example task card.




The key tasks went to Desmond, as the person with the strongest Java experience.
We spread the task cards over the table and agreed an ordering that made sense.
(A schedule that "makes sense" is one that maximizes the chances of achieving the
project objectives, as stated in the mission statement.) We then gave each card a
label (at the bottom of the card) so that we could reconstruct the ordering. After the
meeting, the tasks were copied into Microsoft Project, which is the standard
scheduling tool at TRT UK.

In fact, the majority of the task cards were created before the meeting by Stephen
and Liam, who had gone through this process already. Desmond essentially revisited
the task descriptions, technology choices, and estimates. Nevertheless, the first
planning meeting was a key point in the project. The project had a clear direction,
and all had contributed.


  Figure 8-6. One end of the table that was covered in task cards.
By adding up the totals on the task cards, we arrived at an improved estimate for
the remainder of the project: 134 man days. Adding the cost of exploration (already
spent) gave 154 man days. This was higher than the estimate in the proposal
document, but the sponsor was happy for work to continue on the basis of the
schedule upon which we had agreed.


Increment 1: Walking Skeleton

The purpose of the first increment was to create a skeletal application incorporating
the main architectural features and some core functionality. In Crystal Clear
parlance this is called a Walking Skeleton. Key tasks would be the creation of the
object model and implementation of the software for projecting a scene model onto
the screen.

First we had to select and configure our tools. At TRT UK, projects mainly decide for
themselves which tools they will use. The tools were chosen by the team members,
especially Desmond, on the basis of his experience on other projects. The tools were
as follows.

     Design tool. Together 5.5 was selected. This generates skeletal Java code from
     UML diagrams. Subsequent changes to the software are automatically
     reflected in the UML representation.

     Programming tools. NetBeans 3.5 was chosen as our Java IDE, running on
     J2SE 1.4.2. MATLAB 6.5 had already been chosen for the calibration software,
     with Microsoft Visual C++ for the DLL "glue logic" that would connect the
     compiled MATLAB to Java.

     Unit testing tool. We selected JUnit.

     Version control tool. We used Microsoft SourceSafe 6.0, which is standard at
     TRT UK.

Once the tools were selected and configured, Desmond began creating the
architecture for the software, discussing design issues with Stephen using the
printing whiteboard. The application was designed using the "Model-View-Controller"
paradigm.

At this point we need to say a little more about the application. The application uses
a 3D scene model, which describes the objects in the region observed by the
camera. The scene model consists of a set of 3D points, which are joined together
to form the edges of the objects. The scene model is projected onto the 2D screen
according to the location and orientation of a virtual camera. The picture formed by
the virtual camera is called the projected scene model.

During increment 1, Stephen wrote the Java code for transforming the 3D scene
model into 2D screen coordinates.

Here, there was a change of plan. The original schedule had called for this software
to be written in MATLAB, compiled to DLL, and accessed over the JNI. It soon
became clear that we were not going to achieve that level of integration in the time
available for increment 1. So Stephen wrote the code in Java instead: this way,
Desmond would have something to integrate within increment 1. If the software
proved to be too slow, it could be rewritten in MATLAB later. (MATLAB is optimized
for matrix operations, so we would expect higher performance.) Stephen and
Desmond replanned their work by conducting a brief planning meeting.

Simultaneously, the team continued to refine the requirements, with Liam and
Stephen working together to produce updated screen drafts. Most of the
requirements discussed at this stage concerned usability issues. Liam made one
request for completely new functionality (hidden line removal), and this was turned
down because it was found to complicate the design too much. We knew that Sam's
main concern was to deliver on time, rather than to deliver the most comprehensive
product.

By the end of increment 1, the team had succeeded in creating the walking
skeleton.

The scene model was only a dummy, consisting of a few geometric shapes (a box, a
prism, etc.). The final application would use a scene model that represents the
region being viewed, in this case part of a railway station. The user could click and
drag the camera icon around the plan view, and the application automatically
updated the projected scene model.

It was only a start, but enough to demonstrate some core functionality.
Toward the end of the increment, Sam gave the team its mission statement. This is
one of the work products required by Crystal Clear. It is the only work product asked
of the sponsor.

At the end of increment 1, we held a viewing and a reflection workshop.


Viewing 1

The viewing meeting was held on Friday, October 17, 2003, at the end of increment
1.

Desmond demonstrated the application to Liam and Sam. The meeting was cordial,
with Liam and Sam taking a keen interest in the details of the product. Several
issues were raised in connection with the software and these were recorded on the
printing whiteboard. The whiteboard printout is shown below in Figure 8-8. At the
end of the viewing the team had a view of the product status that was shared,
complete, and reasonably positive.


            Figure 8-8. Whiteboard printout from Viewing 1.

                                [View full size image]




            Figure 8-7. CamCal Calibration mission statement.
On CamCal, we chose to have a viewing at the end of every increment. This is more
than Crystal Clear demands as the methodology only calls for a minimum of two per
release.


Reflection Workshop 1

At the end of increment 1, the team held a reflection workshop. Its purpose was to
identify which aspects of the process were working and which needed to be
changed. The notes from the reflection workshop are shown on the whiteboard
printout in Figure 8-8.

The main points were

     All to spend a day reading CC. The team had not been trained in using the
     methodology. The only training material that was available was the manual on
     CC, so it was suggested and agreed that each team member should spend a
     day reading it.

     Desmond as lead designer. Desmond had been making the key technical
     decisions, because of his experience with Java. Stephen had just been acting
     as "process champion." It was proposed to acknowledge this situation by
     nominating Desmond the lead designer. Desmond was unsure, but agreed to
     think about it.

     "Keep this" statements. The team found much about the methodology that
     they wanted to keep. In particular, the team members were working well
     together. Several of the team members had worked together before on
     projects that had been run differently: they were finding it easier to work
     together on this project.

     Absence of team members. Apart from Desmond, all of the team members
     had significant commitments to other projects. The team recognized this as a
     problem. Agile methods rely on tacit knowledge, so are vulnerable if the
     people are not present.


       Figure 8-9. Whiteboard printout from reflection workshop 1.

                                                                [View full size image]




     Mismatch with TRT UK procedures. Sam was uncomfortable with the fact
     that he was formally responsible for the project, but not in control of its
     schedule.[3]

        [3] We'll see discussion of this point at the end of the field report.




Increment 2: CP Entry and Edit

The objective for increment 2 was to enable the user to enter and edit
"Correspondence Pairs" (CPs). A correspondence pair specifies an association
between a vertex in the scene model, which is three dimensional, and a point in the
image, which is two dimensional. CPs are entered into CamCal by mouse operations.
The user clicks on a point in the image, and drags to the intended vertex in the
projected scene model. The CPs are ultimately used as the input to the calibration
algorithm, which computes the calibration matrix required by ZYX.

Increment 2 began with a planning meeting (Monday, October 20, 2003) in which
the project schedule was rebuilt based on the current situation. The main change
from the original plan was that Stephen would not be available for increment 2. He
had a commitment to another project and would not have time. After discussing the
options, the decision was made to delay his contribution until increment 3.

In the new schedule, some time was allocated to address the issues captured at
Viewing 1, but the priority was to press ahead with the high-risk aspects of the
project, such as calibration and the integration with ZYX.

By the end of the increment, the facility to add and edit correspondence pairs was
ready for demonstration. It used a real scene model instead of just geometric
shapes.

We held another viewing session, and another reflection workshop. The viewing
generated more issues, which were recorded on a whiteboard printout. Again, the
team had achieved a shared view of the status of the product.

This reflection workshop generated fewer points than the first one had. The main
outputs from the reflection workshop were

     At the previous reflection workshop, the team members had agreed to read up
     on the methodology, but they had not found the time. Desmond agreed to do
     this in increment 3.

     The project was not meeting certain parts of the methodology. The peer
     reviews had not happened. The risk list had not been maintained. The
     requirements document had not been firmed up. We agreed to address these
     in increment 3.


Increment 3: Calibration

The increment began with a planning meeting. The tasks for this increment are
summarized below. They were all completed by the end of the increment.

     Peer code review.

     Implement the calibration algorithm in MATLAB, and integrate this with Java.

     Implement GUI facilities supporting calibration.

     Initial system test.
     Desmond to read CC.

The integration between MATLAB and Java had been considered a risk area, so it
was a relief to achieve it.

We tried posting the task cards for the increment on a whiteboard in the team's
working area. This proved to be very effective at communicating the schedule, and
we retained the practice for the remainder of the project.

In addition to these scheduled tasks, the requirements continued to be refined on
an ongoing basis. Liam's original requirement had been that CamCal support two
particular calibration algorithms. But when integration was discussed, we learned
that only one algorithm was compatible with our target system. Since the purpose
of the project was to develop a calibration tool for that system and the team had a
tight schedule, the decision was made to omit the second algorithm.

Stephen firmed up the requirements document, and had it reviewed by Liam and
Desmond. There was also more discussion about detailed GUI behavior. We will
relate some details of the discussion to give a feel for the kind of decisions that
were taking place.

During increment 1, Stephen and Liam had sketched out a user interface that was
wizardlike, so that the user would be guided through the activities that calibration
involves. Each page of the wizard would have panels of fixed size and position.
Desmond, who was more experienced at GUI design, felt that this would be too
restrictive and favored a more flexible design, giving the user the ability to move,
resize, and show/hide the windows. He had implemented the software so that this
aspect of its appearance could readily be changed. The difficulty was that by giving
the user this level of control, the wizardlike nature of the application was lost, and it
might not be obvious to the user what he needed to do.

What was needed was a resolution to the question of how the GUI should behave. At
the planning meeting, Desmond had taken a task to sort the issue out. Desmond
created a design in which the user could select between views using radio buttons.
The views were

     Manual alignment. Here, the projected scene model reflected the position
     and orientation of a virtual camera that the user could control.

     Algorithmic calibration. Here, the projected scene model was formed using
     the calibration algorithm.

     Xxxxx calibration. This was a dummy option. Desmond left it in place to
     show that the user interface could be extended to contain more than one
     calibration algorithm.

Liam felt this arrangement was still not ideal, because the controls for the "manual
alignment" view were visible when the first calibration was selected.
We presented the system at a viewing on Monday, December 8, 2003. At this stage,
most of the core functionality of the application was present. One could load an
image and a scene model, add correspondence pairs, and run the calibration
algorithm. The calibration algorithm finds a transformation that fits the scene model
over the 2D image, so that the wire-frame projection of the scene model is aligned
to objects in the image.

For this viewing, a QA representative had been invited. This was the first QA
involvement with the process. Subsequently, a QA representative was invited to
every meeting on the project. (The QA perspective is presented separately, following
this field report.)


Increment 4: Consolidate for Year End

The main objective for this increment was to bring the project to a state where it
could be closed relatively painlessly. There was a possibility that issues outside the
scope of the project might lead to it being closed at the end of the increment (which
coincided with the end of the year). In fact, this requirement did not affect the
planning too much. The key tasks that needed to be done for our target date of end
of January 2004 needed to be done anyway. The tasks for this increment are
summarized below. All were complete by the end of the increment.

     Create a CD of the application, including an installation tool.

     Integrate with ZYX. This involved having CamCal create a calibration file and
     testing that ZYX could make use of it.

     Start a User Manual. (It could not be finished until the user interface was
     complete.)

     Code reviews and associated actions.

At this point, the project had a page of issues from each viewing. Liam prioritized
them, and they were copied into an issues list that Desmond had created in
Microsoft Outlook. Using Outlook meant that we would all have instant access to the
most recent list.

The increment terminated with a viewing and a reflection workshop. For this
viewing, we ran the software directly from the installation CD to demonstrate that
this worked. Only a few points were raised in the viewing, everybody knew that
there wasn't time for big changes. The reflection workshop was quiet as well with
nobody suggesting any changes to the process.


Increment 5: Complete

The Christmas holiday period provided a natural break between increments, and the
fifth increment began on Monday, January 5, 2004.
At the end of 2003, there was a decision, made outside of the scope of the project,
that CamCal should be completed cheaply at the start of 2004. To achieve this, the
decision was made to omit the acceptance tests and code reviews that had
previously been scheduled. The justification was that the software had already
passed various test and review activities, and this had created a degree of
confidence in the code. The main tasks for the increment were

     The prioritized issues list. After some negotiation, it was agreed that Desmond
     would work down the issues list, addressing all the issues until either he ran
     out of time, or until a certain point in the prioritized list was reached,
     whichever came first.

     Liam to finish the user manual.

     Desmond and Stephen to write a maintenance handbook.

At the end of the increment, we held a final viewing. Compared with the previous
increment, it was generally a bit tidier and more polished. This was the result of
Desmond's work addressing the items in the prioritized issues list. Sam accepted
the application as ready to demonstrate to customers, and asked that it be installed
on the ZYX presentation system.

We held a final reflection workshop. This turned into a general discussion about how
the methodology went overall. The team members' views were generally very
positive. The only substantial issue raised was the fit with TRT UK procedures. If this
could be satisfactorily resolved, then all the participants would be happy to work
this way again.

(In fact, there is a procedure at TRT UK for addressing QMS issues of this sort: any
employee may raise suggestions for process improvement.)


Compliance with Crystal Clear

In this section we summarize the extent to which our pilot project was consistent
with Crystal Clear. We evaluate compliance against the following aspects of Crystal
Clear: the properties, the roles, the life cycle, and the work products.

     Properties

     The CC properties were achieved.

     Roles

     The pilot project allocated roles to the people as Crystal Clear asks. There
     were some deviations from the ideal:

     The lead designer role had to be shared between Stephen and Desmond.
     Stephen took the methodology aspect of the role, and Desmond took the
     technical leadership. This division was necessary because the lead designer
     role requires knowledge both of the technical issues and the methodology.
     While Desmond was the lead designer in the literal sense, he had not been
     trained in the methodology and so Stephen had to take that part of the role.
     This division of responsibility caused some confusion in places, and the project
     would have worked better had the role been taken by a single person.

     There was a deviation in the role of user. The product had two intended uses:
     (1) as a demonstration tool to be used by senior figures at TRT UK, and (2) as
     an installation tool to be used by installation engineers. Liam is a real user of
     the former category. We did not have a user in the latter category.

     Life cycle

     The pilot project initially used an early draft of the methodology that did not
     include the Crystal Clear project start-up activities. These were therefore
     omitted. In other respects the project followed the Crystal Clear life cycle. We
     note the following:

        a. The methodology calls for frequent release of software to users, so as to
           obtain feedback. Our pilot project achieved that by having a user on the
           team. The user was given an updated copy of the program every so
           often.

        b. Crystal Clear calls for a minimum of two viewings per release. We had
           more viewings than this, having made the decision to have a viewing at
           the end of each increment. All of the viewings were useful, but the later
           viewings were less useful because the product had changed relatively
           little between increments.

     Work products

     The pilot project created most of the work products required, apart from the
     following:

        1. Since there was only one release, the release sequence and release
           schedule reduced to a single end date.

        2. The migration code work product is for database applications and was
           not applicable for our pilot project.

        3. The acceptance tests were removed from the schedule when the project
           was curtailed, so there were no acceptance test results.


Analysis

Performance against Estimates

The priorities for the pilot project, as stated in the mission statement were
The project was steered so as to meet these priorities. Note that the primary
objective was the end date, not the final cost. So whenever the end date or usability
appeared threatened, the team reacted by spending effort to solve the problem. The
team was able to do this because only one of its members was working on the
project full time. The others had some flexibility in how much time they committed
to the project.

This is reflected in the graph of estimated versus actual effort shown in Figure 8-10.
The estimates increase gradually from the first planning meeting to the fourth. The
fifth planning meeting shows a reduced estimate that reflects the decision to curtail
the project. (The curtailed project met the underlying business need, which was for
a demonstrable product, not a deliverable one.)


   Figure 8-10. Estimation accuracy (actuals and estimates at the
                     start of each increment).

                                [View full size image]




The proposal phase was not conducted according to the Crystal Clear process, so
does not form part of our experiment. It created an estimate that was found, within
a few weeks of starting the project, to be a considerable underestimate. The main
reason for the problem was that the proposal phase did not include sufficient time to
determine the technology that would be used or the staff who would do the project.

In fact, the figures were not computed until after the project. In hindsight we feel it
would have been advantageous to have computed the figures on the fly.


Analysis from the ISO 9001 Viewpoint

(The field report contained an excerpt from the auditor's analysis. A longer excerpt
from his report is presented separately, following this field report.)


Conclusions

This section presents our evaluation of Crystal Clear. We evaluate the methodology
against the claims that are made for it. We also present a number of issues where
care is needed in using the methodology.


Evaluation of Crystal Clear against its Claims

The claims made for Crystal Clear are that it is efficient, habitable, and safe. On the
basis of our pilot project, we support these claims.

     Efficiency

     The final productivity metric for the project was 81.7 lines of noncomment
     code (system code plus unit test code) per day. This metric was computed by
     dividing the total number of lines of code generated, by the total effort
     expended, including all the noncoding effort. (Note: Unit test code was 26.4
     percent of the Java code.)

     The project did not include acceptance tests, but this would not have changed
     the overall figures very much. Acceptance tests would probably have found
     some small errors that we would then have corrected, but overall, we knew
     that the user and sponsor were already content with the product and it had
     already been subject to various tests.

     This high level of productivity arose, first, from the skills of the designer
     (Desmond). The methodology helped by keeping the development focused,
     and by reducing waste. Waste, in this context, means anything that does not
     contribute to the final product.

     Habitability

     All of the team members would be happy to use this methodology again.
     Several positive comments were received from the team, including:
     Liam (User). "Overall, taking part was an enjoyable experience, and one
     which I would be happy to repeat."

     Desmond (Designer). "I usually felt very focused and energized. . . . I felt
     generally in control."

     Sam (Sponsor). "Communications were excellent . . . the team worked
     together well . . . the software was delivered in a satisfactory working
     condition."

     Further comments from the team are presented further on. Sam had some
     concerns about the fit between the role definitions in Crystal Clear and those
     expected at TRT UK. Sam's approval of the methodology was contingent on
     this issue being satisfactorily resolved.

     Safety

     A safe methodology is one that increases the likelihood of the project
     succeeding. The pilot project succeeded in that it created a product that
     satisfied the sponsor. Beyond that, several aspects of the project were
     demonstrably safe: the plans were always meaningful, hard issues were
     resolved in a timely manner, and the team was always focused on the most
     important features.

The initial estimate for the project was incorrect, but this was conducted outside of
the Crystal Clear experiment.

Crystal Clear does require an experienced and competent lead designer in order to
be safe. Crystal Clear does not define "techniques" (for configuration management,
testing, etc.), and the intention is that the lead designer fills this gap.


Issues Requiring Attention During Adoption

The following aspects of the methodology need attention during adoption:

     It may require established roles to change.

     Crystal Clear gives people roles that may not match the established
     organizational roles.

     At TRT UK, each project has a project manager who is held responsible for
     delivering the project on time and within budget. On our pilot project, this was
     Sam's role. A TRT UK project manager would expect to own the project
     schedule. But under Crystal Clear, scheduling was a communal activity led by
     the lead designer. This was a safer arrangement since it brought the skills of
     all the team members to bear on the scheduling problem. But it created a
     situation where Sam had the same responsibility that he would normally have,
     but with reduced power to influence events.[4]

        [4] I discuss options that Sam might have in the Commentary afterward.
     It challenges established documentation practices.

     Crystal Clear expects initial requirements in the form of a mission statement,
     an actor-goal list, and some use cases. These are not expected to be
     sufficiently precise to define every aspect of the product. The details are
     intended to emerge through interaction between representatives of the
     developer and customer organizations.

     Crystal Clear also places great reliance on tacit knowledge over written
     documents. But tacit knowledge is only available to other team members,
     when the people are simultaneously present. It follows that in order to achieve
     the greatest efficiency, the team members should work together continuously
     on the same project.

     It requires a broadly scoped contract.

     Crystal Clear expects the detailed requirements to emerge as the project
     proceeds, but is silent on the question of how this could fit into a contractual
     framework.[5] One approach would be to adopt the DSDM practice of base
     lining the requirements at a high level. DSDM has been used successfully in
     conjunction with the CMMI, so it is unlikely that this approach would create a
     CMMI or ISO compliance problem.

        [5] This is discussed in Chapter 7.




Recommendations for Future Work

This pilot project exercised many aspects of the methodology, but was limited by its
small size. We recommend a trial on a larger project, having more than one and
one-half developers and more than a single release. A larger trial would still need to
be within the Crystal Clear scope, having no more than eight team members.

Crystal Clear is designed to accommodate practices drawn from XP, such as test-first
design and pair programming. We would recommend that these practices be
incorporated into a future trial.

A study on the fit between Crystal Clear and our standard internal methodology is
planned for later in 2004. If possible we would also like to conclude the work on the
fit between Crystal Clear and the CMMI.


Comments from the Team

The following comments are unedited except where indicated.


Liam's Comments (User)

December 11, 2003
I have never worked on a project in which team members have such a clear picture
of the state of the project's progress. The regular viewing sessions and generated
to-do/bug lists being posted on a whiteboard, creates a single point of access which
all team members can share. The Project Plan, and associated task lists being
posted-up also helps.

The only down-side I have experienced is the high-level of conversation/discussion
that takes place around the main board, disturbing thought when one is not
involved in a team discussion. An ideal solution would be having the space to move
board and discussion away from non-involved team members, during such
meetings.


February 3, 2004

The manner in which the Agile/Crystal Clear methodology roles had to be modified
to fit with existing company procedures, led to a degree of reactivity in the
evaluation process. For example, the senior-designer/coordinator (Stephen)
appeared to be questioned over the management of project costs by the sponsor,
when in fact only the sponsor (Sam) had full access to the cost information. If the
approach evaluated had been fully integrated with company procedures these issues
would not have arisen. Overall, taking part was an enjoyable experience, and one
which I would be happy to repeat.


Desmond's Comments (Designer)

Focus and Efficiency

As a designer/developer, I usually felt very "focused" and "energized." During each
increment I felt I had a clear idea of which features we would be adding, roughly
how they should work, how long they should take, and which were the most
important. I felt generally "in control."

The short length of the increments and the clear idea of a goal at the end also
helped maintain focus on essentials. Each short increment had a clear goal: a set of
functionality to be implemented and a demonstration of it to the users. The overall
feeling was that we were being fast and efficient. That we were focused clearly on
valuable features, and that we made efficient progress.

On other developments one might get a chance to "disappear" for a few months,
working towards one big goal. Having contrasted this with Crystal Clear, it now
seems to me that Crystal Clear is much more efficient: there is always a slight
pressure to deliver, to concentrate on the essentials, that feels like it delivers real
value. Or rather, that it avoids some of the inefficiencies in the old approach.

This energized, focused feeling is produced by various factors:

     Involvement in the planning of each increment.
     Familiarity with the set of requirements and the users' priorities (in value
     terms) for them.

     Sense of achievement as each increment is completed, and within increments,
     as each feature was added.

     To a lesser extent, being freed from the perceived "drudgery" of heavier
     processes. In fact, it didn't feel like much was actually being dropped. But the
     knock-on effects of using the lighter process definitely contributed to the good
     feeling.


"Deliverability" and Control

At nearly all times on the project it felt like we had a working product, with clear
ideas of how to proceed, and confidence that something useful would be delivered.
So we did not feel out of control, or worried about whether we would actually
produce something at the end.


Differences with "Traditional" Methods

From my point of viewfrom the point of view of someone moving from "traditional"
development procedures to Crystalthere are two principles that seem to differentiate
Crystal Clear from the old way of working:

1. Minimum necessary overhead: do everything in the "lightest" way possible,
   consistent with achieving the results. It took a while to become comfortable
   with the lighter weight processes and documentation. But after a while it
   became quite easy to stick to, and quite liberating.

2. View feedback from users in a positive way. Don't view oversights or changes
   as problems, but as discoveries. I had to keep re-emphasizing this to myself.



Sam's Comments (Sponsor)

Communications

Communications were excellent: the core team was co-located in a single area. A
printing whiteboard was used to record information, which was then held in a file:
this proved to be a time saver. However, it would have been good to have more
space to post the information for the team to view.

Viewings and reflection workshops were held each month and certainly kept the
whole team up to date with the demonstrable progress of the project. However, the
number of iterations and viewings increased from 3 to 5, and this was excessive.
Planning/Project Management

From a project manager's viewpoint, I felt a little out of control for two reasons:

     The day-to-day management was delegated to the lead designer.

     I was not familiar with the Crystal Clear methodology.

Although not part of Crystal Clear, the project proposal promised that the scope of
work could be varied to keep within the original budget. This was not achieved in
practice and the project had to be curtailed at a point prior to full completion.

For future projects, the role of project manager needs to be very carefully thought
out. Crystal Clear does not fit in well with existing TRT UK procedures and so some
changes will be required.


People

The team worked together well, although this project was not typical, in that most
of the development was performed by one person. The concept of having little
documentation did not work well in the early stages because team members were
on holiday or committed to other work. It is a credit to the team that the project
was so successful in spite of this.


Deliverables

The software was delivered in a satisfactory working condition. The requirements'
document, user manual, and maintenance handbook are all in draft form, because
they were produced late in the project and the project curtailment prevented them
from being reviewed and issued. Had the documents been produced earlier, there
would have been time to review and approve them. They would also have been of
use to guide the development work. In practice, an ISO 9001 audit would have
caused some problems for the project.

Because the project was curtailed, the software is not yet ready for release to
customers, although it can be used for demonstrations.


Summary

For projects that can be clearly specified at the beginning, Crystal Clear does not
appear to offer significant advantages over a well-run lightweight project that
follows standard TRT UK processes. However, it is accepted that for projects such as
this, with a large humancomputer interface component, where the requirements are
difficult to express clearly, Crystal Clear offers some advantages.
The use of paper documents, printing whiteboards, and co-located working may not
be practicable for widespread use, and a better approach would be to use electronic
documents as is current practice in TRT UK. The problems with team members being
on leave at critical times would have been reduced by drafting earlier, more detailed
documentation. However the viewings and reflection workshops were very important
and should be retained as face-to-face meetings.

(End of report.)
THE AUDITOR'S REPORT
(CamCal was a process experiment. The auditor analyzed what would need to be
done in order for a Crystal Clear project to pass an ISO 9001 audit. The auditor's
text follows.)


Scope

This audit is supplementary to the Management System Audit Plan and was
performed at the request of the lead designer on the CamCal elements of the ZYX
project.

Crystal Clear (CC) is a software development methodology that is currently being
established to enable close, collaborative working of a small software team. The
method is considered "lightweight" when compared with a full mission-critical or
safety-critical development (e.g., Mil Std 498, ESA PSS-05-0, etc.) and follows a
hybrid incremental/evolutionary life cycle. This type of approach is described as
Rapid Application Development (RAD) within the TickIT Guide.

CC calls for close interaction between the customer and developers and defines a
number of distinct roles.

CamCal had adopted a modified version of the CC method as a conscious
experiment in lightweight software development.

The objective of this audit was to assess the CC design methodology as applied to
CamCal against the requirements of ISO 9001:2000 and the associated TickIT
Guide. Inevitably, the specific implementation as applied to CamCal influenced the
approach and findings of the audit.

Two checklists were prepared from the TickIT Guide. The first was against Part D,
"Guidance for Auditors" and the second was against Part E, "Software Quality
Management System RequirementsStandards Perspective."


Findings

Both ISO 9001:2000 and TickIT are defined within the framework of a full QMS.
Consequently, as CamCal (or any other internal project that follows the CC
methodology) will operate within the TRT-UK QMS, only the following project-specific
elements of ISO 9001:2000 were examined.


Planning of Product Realization

ISO/TickIT require planning of processes for product realization. While CamCal has
an overall project plan[6] (which includes the quality requirements) and schedule,
there is no detailed project plan for the CamCal development, but proposal
document CamCal-01-003 was referenced from the project plan.

  [6] "Project plan" refers not to the project schedule, but to a plan for the processes used.



Proposal document CamCal-01-003 had been issued and covered initial planning of
CamCal. This gives brief descriptions of the method and a proposed three-iteration
life cycle. One of the key features of CC is that each planned iteration (there were
five planned later) includes a planning meeting that allows the project to be
dynamically replanned. An iteration consists of three mandatory stages: planning;
design, code, integrate; and reflection workshop. In addition, an iteration may be
followed by a viewing attended by the user and possibly by the sponsor.

In order to be fully compliant with this clause of ISO 9001, the QMS would need
modification to provide detail of the working practices associated with CC to avoid
the need to reproduce this detail in the PP for every RAD project. A dedicated
project plan would then need to reference the QMS or modify the practices as
necessary. The project plan would also need to include or reference the following (as
appropriate): customer quality requirements; risks or risk management process;
methods, tools, standards, etc.; statutory and regulatory requirements;
deliverables, including documents; other documents; verification and validation
approach; approvals, authorizations, acceptance; roll-out; prototyping; and release.

CC specifies a risk list that needs to be maintained. It is recommended that the
normal TRT-UK risk management process is followed.


Determination of Requirements Related to the Product

ISO/TickIT require determination of requirements related to the product. CamCal
has a sponsor mission statement and an evolving requirement document (RD)
CamCal-02-003 as required by CC, which contained an actor-goal list and a number
of use cases. The mission statement has numbered and prioritized objectives, the
RD has been evolving throughout development.

These documents are capable of satisfying the ISO/TickIT requirements.

It was suggested that in future it would be useful to have two separate documents
to distinguish between contractual requirements (mission statement plus actor-goal
list) and the evolving CC requirements document which would contain use cases and
lower-level details and could be treated as design detail rather than formal
requirements under ISO 9001.


Review of Requirements Related to the Product

ISO/TickIT require review of requirements related to the product. CamCal involved
review and approval of the mission statement and ongoing review of the RD. The
review of the RD was carried out with the user rather than sponsor, and there had
been no formal issues (document remained at Issue 1 Draft C at end, although the
project had been prematurely terminated).

In order to be fully compliant with this clause of ISO 9001, the RD should undergo a
draft revision (with comments maintained in Visual SourceSafe) for each project
iteration or preferably undergo an approved up-issue for each iteration. This would
provide visibility of latest stable requirements for each iteration and the mandatory
records of review required by ISO 9001.

If Contractual Requirements were treated separately from design detail, as
suggested earlier, contractual requirements only should be subject to review at the
proposal stage as required by ISO 9001.


Customer Communication

ISO/TickIT require customer communication to take place. The involvement of the
customer (normally sponsor and user) is central to CC through viewings and
reflection workshops during each iteration.

Consequently this aspect is well covered. CamCal held these meetings and
maintained whiteboard records.

CC requires close cooperation with customer representatives over a long period.
Careful choice of team members can reduce the risk of poor cooperation.


Design and Development Planning

ISO/TickIT require planning of the design and development activities. In TRT-UK this
detail would normally be contained in (or referenced from) the project plan and
schedule. For CC, most of the practices and proposed iterations could be in these
same documents. CamCal did not have a detailed project plan for CamCal but did
have a proposal document and did maintain the schedule.

In order to be fully compliant with this clause of ISO 9001, the requirements defined
in 7.1 would need to be followed. The schedule would need to reflect the latest
planning meeting (as it does on CamCal).

In CC plans may be changed at the planning meeting associated with each iteration.
This should be recognized in the project plan, and the scope of changes that may be
made without revision of the project plan should be defined.


Design and Development Inputs

ISO/TickIT require definition of the design and development inputs. CamCal placed
this information into a requirement document (RD) CamCal-02-003 as required by
CC. The RD included most of the topics required by TickIT. Unfortunately, the RD
was never formally issued.
If contractual requirements were treated separately from design detail, as
suggested earlier, this requirement would be met.

In common with clause 7.2.2, to be fully compliant with this clause of ISO 9001, the
RD should undergo a draft revision (with comments maintained in VSS) for each
project iteration or preferably undergo an approved up-issue for each iteration. This
would provide visibility of latest stable requirements for each iteration and the
mandatory records of review required by ISO 9001.


Design and Development Outputs

ISO/TickIT require attributes relating to the design and development outputs.
CamCal did not issue all the defined outputs following early termination of the
project. Unit code underwent peer review and checking through the Together suite.
Acceptance testing was not carried out because project was curtailed.

In order to be fully compliant with this clause of ISO 9001, each project would need
to ensure all software tools and embedded COTS had been, or were to be,
evaluated. Executable code would need to be verified during development, and each
release would need to be adequately defined and validated.


Design and Development Review

ISO/TickIT require review of the design and development. CC specifies "viewings
and reflection workshops." CamCal carried these out and kept whiteboard records.

In order to be fully compliant with this clause of ISO 9001, whiteboard records
would need to indicate who was involved with the viewings and workshops. In
addition, the sponsor and/or user should be present at some or all in order to
ensure reviewer independence. Actions should be clearly identified to enable
tracking at the next workshop. The whiteboard records would need to be kept for
the mandatory records of review required by ISO 9001.


Design and Development Verification

ISO/TickIT require verification of the design and development. CC specifies
verification of work products, and CamCal did carry out unit test (although no
records were kept) and demonstration/review by the user during viewings. Failures
were also not formally recorded during test.

In order to be fully compliant with this clause of ISO 9001, records of tests
performed (including test cases/stimuli) and results obtained would need to be
taken for the mandatory records required.[7] Review of performance against current
requirements should be carried out at planned stages.

  [7] Here is where automated unit and acceptance regression tests come in handyAlistair.
Design and Development Validation

ISO/TickIT require end-to-end verification of the design and development. CC
specifies test cases, test records, and defect reports, CamCal did not produce these
due to early termination.

In order to be fully compliant with this clause of ISO 9001, records of tests
performed (including test cases/stimuli) and results obtained would need to be
taken for the mandatory records required. Some form of tracing would be necessary
for those requirements not tested or demonstrated.[8]

  [8] This refers to usability and other requirements that don't have a function test.




Control of Design and Development Changes

ISO/TickIT requires control of changes during design and development. Dynamic
change is central to CC, which controls changes on two levels; changes to the
mission or requirements would be made in the deliverable documents; changes in
the design are less formally controlled through workshops and planning meetings.
CamCal kept actions lists and recorded completion at viewings. Regression testing
was used to verify the effects of changes, but formal records were not kept.

In order to be fully complaint with this clause of ISO 9001, whiteboard records
would need to indicate who was involved with the viewings and workshops in order
to provide the mandatory records required for review of changes. As discussed
earlier, records of regression tests performed (including test cases/stimuli) and
results obtained would also need to be taken.


Conclusions and Recommendations

Project CamCal adopted the Crystal Clear rapid development method as a trial and
demonstration within TRT-UK of how the process could be used. The customer for
the project was internal (hence protecting any external "real" customers from the
experiment), but the project was unfortunately terminated early. However, due to
the nature of the CC method, the early termination did not prohibit a useful
software product.

This audit assesses the CC methodology against ISO 9001:2000 and the associated
TickIT Guide, using CamCal as a case study. Inevitably, the detailed processes
followed by the project had some bearing on the observations and findings.

CC is generally compliant with ISO 9001, particularly considering that the TickIT
Guide acknowledges and accommodates Rapid Application Development (RAD). Full
compliance would require a few extra disciplines/records as described under
findings.

It is recommended that:
     The TRT-UK QMS is enhanced to provide a generic framework for the CC
     methodology (preferably named something like "Rapid Development Method"
     as CC is something of a trademark). The enhancements should include the ISO
     mandatory requirements.

     Each CC project should still create a project plan to adopt or modify the
     generic approach.

     Further in-house developments are carried out to CC, in order to fully
     understand the implementation and develop the new procedures.

Once established, external customers are given the choice of development
methodology, including information on the processes, potential benefits, and their
obligations.
REFLECTION ON THE FIELD AND AUDIT REPORTS
First of all, I wish to thank both Stephen and Thales Research and Technology for
the excellent field report, complete as it is with photos and interviews, and for
permission to publish it, even in excerpted form. Speaking as someone who has
read a lot of experience reports, I find it unusually clear and informative, with useful
detail and candor.

I left all of the participants' questioning and worrying about Crystal Clear in place
because I suspect these will be common reactions in many organizations, and it is
useful for you to see them laid out in front of you.

In this section, I consider two of their worries and discuss how to deal with them in
different contexts. With luck, this will help Thales in the future, and also you.


Reallocation of Power

The project manager and sponsor, Sam, mentioned several times that he felt
somewhat disempowered, not having control over the task time estimates and day-
to-day management. Responsibility without authority is a worrisome thing. Sam
quite reasonably requests a review of the project manager's role in Crystal Clear.

In discussing this with Stephen, we discovered a number of issues and strategies
surrounding this issue.

First, power really does get reallocated, in one of two directions.

The sponsor has the responsibility to provide clear priorities and preferred outcomes
when direction trade-offs need to be made. The developers have the responsibility
of estimating how long the tasks will take. Together, they have joint responsibility to
name all the tasks, and to generate the optimal strategy that will produce the best
outcome for the project given the task list, task estimates, and project priorities.

In some companies, the project manager runs the show, naming the tasks, the
estimates, and the strategies. Having been in this position for years, I can say that
this is a losing proposition. It is almost impossible for the project manager to
correctly guess all the tasks that need to be done and their estimates. Starting from
the day I first saw Jens Coldewey run a joint planning session, I realized just how
impossible.

In other companies, the programmers run the show, telling the sponsor what they
will do and when they might be done, never minding what the business's priorities
happen to be. This is also incorrect.

In each case, someone is likely to feel displaced by the reallocation of power in
Crystal Clear (and other agile methods). The key to success is the recognition that
everyone is in this together, the project is a joint activity, and both groups need to
provide the information they possess in order to get the best outcome.
Second, the sponsor is still not without power.

Suppose that the planning session produces a timeline that the sponsor considers
unacceptable. She has three recourses:

     Remove some of the items to be delivered or extend the time allowed.

     Get more creative about the plan: offload the team members, do more in
     parallel, or buy packages that accomplish part of the work. Much can be done
     with some creative brainstorming.

     Reduce all the time estimates by a percentage. Yes, this is a drastic measure,
     but it is still an alternative. Imagine that the sponsor says, "All very well, but
     we can't live with that schedule and we can't cut any more scope. I'll give you
     80 percent of the time listed on each card, so that we can make the final
     date." At this point, everyone has seen the cards, so they know the original
     estimates. The team can track to both the original and reduced estimates and
     report against both in their status charts. Visibility will be kept high. I suspect
     that if the sponsor feels she must resort to this alternative, then there isn't a
     different development methodology that will produce a better result anyway. I
     also suggest that the team keep brainstorming for a better strategy.


"It requires a broadly scoped contract"

The field report concludes, "Crystal Clear expects the detailed requirements to
emerge as the project proceeds, but is silent on the question of how this could fit
into a contractual framework. One approach would be to adopt the DSDM practice of
baselining the requirements at a high level."

CamCal was based on an early draft of Crystal Clear. I hope that I have managed in
this final version to show how it can work in a contractual framework.

Crystal Clear does not require the detailed requirements to emerge as the project
proceeds, although it permits them to. You are not at all obliged to change the
requirements at the start of an iteration. If you have detailed requirements at the
start that are not permitted to shift, then simply don't shift them!

It may be that you have committed to a scope, price, and time without having had
time to properly investigate the requirements and plausible architectures (this is
distressingly normal in our industry). You discover part of the way through the
project that the original bid was simply wrong. You have several options, none of
them pretty:

     Go back to the sponsors/buyers and renegotiate. This is not a matter for
     Crystal Clear or any other methodology to deal with. This has everything to do
     with how good your executive's relations are with the buyers and what they
     can change. They may be able to rebid the project, or they may not.
     Carefully prioritize your work to deliver the maximum business value in the
     time available, so that the features left out at the deadline are obvious to
     everyone as being the least important ones. Having delivered what is clearly
     the most valuable business functionality is the best bargaining chip you can
     give your executives to work with.[9]

        [9] See the discussions in Early Victory (p. 48), Burn Charts (p. 94), and Essential Interaction Design (p. 80).




     Be very creative in your strategy generation and find a way to deliver the bid.

     Get ready either to work overtime or change jobs. Even the best agile
     methodology can't change your social rules (but it may make you a more
     attractive hire).



I should round out this reflection with a final note about "Sam," the sponsor.
Stephen writes, "[A]t the last reflection workshop, the sponsor also said that the
advantages greatly outweighed the disadvantages. He's suggested we try it again,
on a larger project, provided the fit with our existing procedures can be resolved."

Relevant to the tests for methodology design, the project delivered an adequate
result for the sponsor, and the people (including the sponsor) are willing to use it
again.
Chapter 9. Distilled (The Short Version)
At the end, it is time to roll it all back up again: What is the core of Crystal Clear,
and what puts the team farther into the safety zone? This chapter is very short.

Crystal Clear is a highly optimized way to use a small, co-located team, prioritizing
for efficiency, habitability, and safety in delivering a satisfactory outcome. The brief
description of Crystal Clear for level-3 practitioners is just this:

   The lead designer and two to seven other developers

      in a large room or adjacent rooms,

      using information radiators such as whiteboards and flip charts,

      having easy access to expert users,

      distractions kept away,

         deliver running, tested, usable code to the users

      every month or two (quarterly at worst),

      reflecting and adjusting their working conventions periodically.

The team members establish the safety properties below using the techniques they
consider appropriate. The first three properties are required in Crystal Clear; the
next four get the team further into the safety zone.

   1. Frequent Delivery

   2. Reflective Improvement

   3. Osmotic Communication

   4. Personal Safety

   5. Focus

   6. Easy Access to Expert Users

   7. A Technical Environment with Automated Tests, Configuration Management,
      and Frequent Integration

All the other pages in this book only expand on this page.
References
(Adams 2002) Adams, B., Webb, R. , "Trust in Small Military Teams," from the 7th International
Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, available online at
http://www.dodccrp.org/Activities/Symposia/7thICCRTS/Tracks/pdf/006.PDF.

(Adolph 2002) Adolph, S., Bramble, P. , Patterns for Effective Use Cases, Addison-Wesley,
Boston, MA, 2003.

(Alexander 1977) Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M. , A Pattern Language: Towns,
Buildings, Construction, Oxford University Press, Oxford, England, 1977.

(Ambler 2002) Ambler, S. , Agile Modeling: Effective Practices for Extreme Programming and the
Unified Process, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 2002.

(Andrews url) Andrews, M. , "Seating Layout for 20 Please,"
http://www.wrytradesman.com/blog/archives/000006.html

(Astels 2003) Astels, D. , Test Driven Development: A Practical Guide, Pearson Education, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 2003.

(Beck 1999) Beck, K. , Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, Addison-Wesley,
Boston, MA, 1999.

(Beck 2000) Beck, K., Fowler, M. , Planning Extreme Programming, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA,
2000.

(Beck 2003) Beck, K. , Test Driven Development: By Example, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA,
2003.

(Berczuk 2003) Berczuk, S., Appleton, B. , Software Configuration Management Patterns:
Effective Teamwork, Practical Integration, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2003.

(Boehm 2003) Boehm, B., Turner, R. , Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed,
Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2003.

(Borning 2003) Borning, A., Freeman-Benson, B. , "YP and Urban Simulation: Applying an Agile
Programming Methodology in a Politically Tempestuous Domain,"
http://agiledevelopmentconference.com/2003/schedule/researchpapers.html#P1

(Cockburn 1998) Cockburn, A. , Surviving Object-Oriented Projects, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA,
1998.

(Cockburn 2000) Cockburn, A. , "Selecting a Project's Methodology," IEEE Software, 17(4),
July/Aug 2000, pp. 6471.

(Cockburn 2001a) Cockburn, A. , "Using CRC Cards,"
http://alistair.cockburn.us/crystal/articles/ucrcc/usingcrccards.html

(Cockburn 2001b) Cockburn, A. , Writing Effective Use Cases, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA,
2001.

(Cockburn 2002) Cockburn, A. , Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2002.

(Cockburn 2003a) Cockburn, A ., People and Methodologies in Software Development, Ph.D.
dissertation, Institute for Informatik, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2003.
(Cockburn 2003b) Cockburn, A. , "The Cone of Silence (and other Project Management
Strategies)," http://alistair.cockburn.us/crystal/articles/cos/coneofsilence.htm

(Cockburn 2004a) Cockburn, A. , "Extending An Architecture As It Earns Business Value,"
http://alistair.cockburn.us/crystal/articles/eaaaiebv/extendinganarchitecture.htm

(Cockburn 2004b) Cockburn, A. , "The End of Software Engineering and the Start of Economic-
Cooperative Gaming," ComSIS Journal, 1(1), 2004, pp. 1-32, available online at
http://www.comsis.fon.bg.ac.yu/ComSISpdf/Volume01/InvitedPapers/AlistairCockburn.htm

(Cockburn 2004c) Cockburn, A. , "What the Agile Toolkit Contains,"
http://alistair.cockburn.us/crystal/articles/wtatc/whattheagiletoolboxcontains.htm

(Cockburn 2004d) Cockburn, A. , "Earned-Value and Burn Charts,"
http://alistair.cockburn.us/crystal/articles/evabc/earnedvalueandburncharts.htm

(Cockburn 2004e) Cockburn, A. , "What the Agile Toolbox Contains," CrossTalk magazine,
available online at
http://alistair.cockburn.us/crystal/articles/wtatc/whattheagiletoolboxcontains.htm

(Cockburn url eie) Cockburn, A. , " Expert in Earshot," http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?ExpertInEarshot

(Cohn 2004) Cohn, M. , User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley,
Boston, MA, 2004.

(Constantine 1999) Constantine, L., Lockwood, L. , Software for Use, Addison-Wesley, Boston,
MA, 1999.

(Costa 2002) Costa, A. , "The Role of Trust for the Functioning of Teams in Organisations,"
http://www.sses.com/public/events/euram/complete_tracks/trust_within_organizations/costa.pdf

(Cunningham url crc) Cunningham, W. , "Crc Card," http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?CrcCard

(DeMarco 1999) DeMarco, T., Lister, T. , Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams, 2nd Ed.,
Dorset House, New York, NY, 1999.

(Denne 2003) Denne, M., Cleland-Huang, J. , Software by Numbers: Low-Risk, High-Return
Development, Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2004.

(Ehn 1988) Ehn, P. , Work-Oriented Development of Software Artifacts, Arbetslivscentrum,
Stockholm, 1988.

(Evans 2003) Evans, E. , Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software,
Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2003.

(Fleming 1988) Fleming, Quentin W. , Cost/Schedule Control Systems Criteria, The Management
Guide to C/SCSC, Probus, Chicago, 1988.

(Fowler 1999) Fowler, M. , Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code, Addison-Wesley,
Boston, MA, 1999.

(Fowler 2003) Fowler, M. , UML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Standard Object Modeling
Language, Third Edition, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2003.

(Gamma 1995) Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., Vlissides, J. , Design Patterns, Addison-
Wesley, Boston, MA, 1995.

(Goldratt 1992) Goldratt, E. , The Goal, North River Press, Great Barrington, MA, 1992.

(Gries 1981) Gries, D. , The Science of Programming, Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1981.
(Hass 2003) Hass, A. M. , Configuration Management Principles and Practice, Addison-Wesley,
Boston, MA, 2003.

(Herring 2001) Herring, R., Rees, M. , "Internet-Based Collaborative Software Development Using
Microsoft Tools," in Proceedings of the 5th World Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics and
Informatics (SCI'2001). July 22-25, 2001, Orlando, Florida., available online at
http://erwin.dstc.edu.au/Herring/SoftwareEngineeringOverInternet-SCI2001.pdf

(Highsmith 2000) Highsmith, J. , Adaptive Software Development, Dorset House, New York, NY,
2000.

(Highsmith 2003) Highsmith, J. , Agile Software Development Ecosystems, Addison-Wesley,
Boston, MA, 2003.

(Highsmith 2004) Highsmith, J. , Agile Project Management: Creating Innovative Products,
Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2004.

(Hohmann 1997) Hohmann, L. Journey of the Software Professional, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ, 1997.

(Hunt 1999) Hunt, A., Thomas, D. , The Pragmatic Programmer: From Journeyman to Master,
Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 1999.

(Hunt 2004) Hunt, A., Thomas, D. , Pragmatic Unit Testing in C# with NUnit, The Pragmatic
Bookshelf, Dallas, TX, 2003.

(Keil 1995) Keil, M., Carmel, E. , "Customer-Developer Links," in Communications of the ACM,
May, 1995, pp. 33-44.

(Kerth 2001) Kerth, N. , Project Retrospectives: A Handbook for Team Reviews, Dorset House,
New York, NY, 2001.

(Kramer 1996), Kramer, R., Tyler, T. , Trust in Organizations, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks,
CA, 1996.

(Krutchen 1999) Krutchen, P. , The Rational Unified Process, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 1999.

(Larman 2003) Larman, C. , Agile and Iterative Development: A Manager's Guide, Addison-
Wesley, Boston, MA, 2003.

(Laufer 1996) Laufer, A. , Simultaneous Management: Managing Projects in a Dynamic
Environment, American Management Association, New York, NY 1996.

(Lett 1998) Lett, Steven , "An Earned-Value Tracking System for Self-Directed Software Teams,"
European Software Engineering Process Group, 1998, available online at
http://www.benchmarkqa.com/PDFs/software_teams.pdf

(Low 2004) Low, L. , "First Things First," CIO Magazine, March 15, 2004, available online at
http://www.cio.com/archive/031504/case.html

(Mathiassen 2001) Mathiassen, L., Pries-Heje, J., Ngwenyama, O. , Improving Software
Organizations, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2001.

(McCarthy 2002) McCarthy, J., McCarthy, M. , Software for Your Head: Core Protocols for
Creating and Maintaining Shared Vision, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2002.

(McConnell 1998) McConnell, S. , Software Project Survival Guide, Microsoft Press, Redmond,
WA, 1998.
(McNeill 1994) McNeill, D. , Fuzzy Logic: The Revolutionary Computer Technology That is
Changing Our World, Simon and Schuster, New York, NY 1994.

(Mills 1988) Mills, H., Poore, J. , "Bringing Software Under Statistical Quality Control," Quality
Progress, Nov. 1988, pp. 52-55.

(Mishra 1996), Mishra, A. , "Organizational Response to Crisis: The Centrality of Trust," in
Kramer, R., Tyler, T. , Trust in Organizations, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 1996, pp.
261287.

(Naur 1992) Naur, P. , "Programming as Theory Building," in Computing: A Human Activity, ACM
Press, New York, NY, 1992, pp. 37-48.

(Ogunnaike 1992) Ogunnaike, B., Ray, W. , Process Dynamics, Modeling, and Control, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, England, 1992.

(Olson 2000) Olson, G., Olson, J. "Distance Matters," Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 15,
2001, pp. 139-179.

(Patton 2002) Patton, J. , "Hitting the Target: Adding Interaction Design to Agile Software
Development," in SIGPLAN Notices, 2002(3), available online at
http://oopsla.acm.org/extra/pracreports/HittingTheTargeReport.pdf

(Patton 2003) Patton, J. , "Unfixing the Fixed Scope Project," Agile Development Conference
2003, available online at
http://agiledevelopmentconference.com/2003/schedule/experiencereports.html#R13

(Poppendieck 2003) Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T. , Lean Software Development: An Agile
Toolkit for Software Development Managers, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2003.

(Schwaber, 2002) Schwaber, K., Beedle, M. , Scrum: Agile Software Development, Prentice-Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2002.

(Simone url) Simone, C. , "According To Script: Steps to Scriptability,"
http://www.mactech.com/articles/develop/issue_24/according.html

(Snyder 2003) Snyder, C. , Paper Prototyping: The Fast and Easy Way to Design and Refine User
Interfaces, Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 2003.

(Stapleton 2003) Stapleton, J. , DSDM Consortium, DSDM: Business Focused Development,
Second Edition, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2003.

(Thomas 2003) Thomas, D., Hunt, A. , Pragmatic Version Control using CVS, The Pragmatic
Bookshelf, Dallas, TX, 2003.

(Weick 1979) Weick, K. , The Social Psychology of Organizing, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1979.

(Williams 2002) Williams, L., Kessler, R. , Pair Programming Illuminated, Addison-Wesley, Boston,
MA, 2002.
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

access
    expert users 2nd 3rd
       collaboration
activities
    chartering
       building teams 2nd 3rd
       Exploratory 360
       planning initial projects 2nd
       shaping methodologies
    cycles 2nd
    non-bottleneck
actor-gioal lists 2nd
adaptation of methologies
add-on practices
agile development
    essential interaction design strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
    rating 2nd
allocation
    of teams to roles 2nd
amicability
analysis
    field report 2nd
annotaing user roles
architecture
    Incremental Rearchitecture 2nd 3rd
    RUP
    system
    Walking Skeleton strategy
architetcure
    IE
    UML 2nd
assignments
    roles [See also roles]
auditor's report
    conclusions 2nd
    findings 2nd 3rd 4th
    recommendations 2nd
    scope
automated regression testing
automated test results
automated testiing 2nd 3rd 4th
automated testing 2nd
availability
   users 2nd
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

backlogs
    dynamic
behavior
    stages of
Blitz Planning strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
blitz-planning
briainstorming
bug reports, testers 2nd
building teams 2nd 3rd
burn charts 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th
burn-down charts
business experts 2nd 3rd
    project maps
    requirements files 2nd
    user cases
business-value sampling
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

calibration 2nd
CamCal
camera calibration
   mission statement
capturing
   tasks
   user roles
capturing output
certification
chapter formats, methodologies
chartering
   Exploratory 360°
   Exploratory 360° strategy
   initial project planning 2nd
   methodology shaping
   RUP
   team building 2nd 3rd
charts
   burns 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th
   project status
check-in meetings
chronology
   field report 2nd
       calibration 2nd
       completion
       consolidation 2nd
       CP entry and edit 2nd
       Exploration phase 2nd 3rd
       first planning meeting 2nd
       reflection workshops 2nd
       viewing meeting
       walking skeleton 2nd
CMM(I) 2nd 3rd
CMM(I) certification
coarse grained planning
code
   evolvability
   feedback
  frameworks
      estimation of
   frequent delivery 2nd
   ownership 2nd
   personal safety property
   refactoring
   rules
   source
   testing 2nd 3rd 4th
cohesion, building
collaboration
   across organizational boundaries
comments
   field report 2nd 3rd
   project status 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
common domain models 2nd 3rd
commuication
   osmotic
communicaiton
   osmotic
communication
   close
   customer
   daily stand-up meetings
   distributed teams 2nd
   efficiency of
   elements
   feedback [See also feedback]
   Information Radiators strategy 2nd 3rd 4th
   large teams
   misinterpretations 2nd 3rd 4th
   osmotic 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
   paths 2nd
   problem solving techniques
   reflective improvement
   Scrum 2nd
   side-by-side programming 2nd
communicaton
   osmotic
completion
completion rituals
   delivery cycle
   delivery cyles
   iteration cycle
compliance
    field report 2nd
    ISO 9001
components
    system architecture
    UML 2nd
conclusions
    auditor's report 2nd
concurrent development 2nd 3rd 4th
cone of silence
configuration
    management 2nd
       automated testing 2nd 3rd 4th
consolidation 2nd
continuous integration-with-test
control of changes
    design 2nd
    development 2nd
conventions
    habitability
    shaping
    teams 2nd 3rd
coordinators 2nd
    iteration 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    project maps
    project status 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    release plans 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    risk lists 2nd
    viewing schedules
Correspondence Pairs (CPs) 2nd
cose communication
costs
    decisions
    of development 2nd 3rd
CPs (Correspondence Pairs) 2nd
critical aspects of development
criticality
current assignments
customer communication
cycles
   iteration
       optimal length of 2nd 3rd
    projects 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
       chartering 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th
       daily and weekly
       delivery 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
      development episodes
      integration
      iteration 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
      process oevrview
cyles
   iteraiton
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

daily cycles
daily stand-up meetings
daily stand-ups
decisions
   economic consequences of
defects
deliver
   frequency
deliver plans
deliveries
  frequency
      Scrum
delivery 2nd
   completion rituals 2nd
   cycles
  demos
      misinterpretations 2nd
   frequent 2nd
   increments
   iterations
   misinterpretations
   multiple
   packages
   postdelivery reflection workshops
   real user deployment
   release plan recalibration
   safety
   workflow dependency graphs
delivery plans
Delphi Estimation strategy 2nd
demos
   delivery 2nd
   users
dependency graphs
deployment
   delivery to real users
descriptions
   of elements 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
design 2nd
   control of changes 2nd
   essential interaction design strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
   inputs
   notes 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
   outputs
   planning
   reviews 2nd 3rd
   rules [See also rules]
   tetsing
   trust
   validation
   verification
designer programmers 2nd
   common domain models 2nd 3rd
   delivery packages
   design notes 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
   screen drafts 2nd 3rd
   source code
   tests 2nd 3rd
designer-programmers 2nd 3rd
detaching
determination of requirements
developers
   Blitz Planning startegy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
development
   agile 2nd
   code
      rules
   concurrent
   control of changes 2nd
   cycles [See also cycles]
   efficiency
   episodes
   essential interaction design strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
   inputs
   outputs
   properties [See also properties]
   reflective improvement 2nd
   reviews
   RUP
   simultaneous
   speed of 2nd 3rd
   validation
   verification
devlopment
   planning
diagrams
   actor-goal lists 2nd
   common domain models 2nd 3rd
   design notes 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
   project maps
diminishing returns
discipline
distributed teams 2nd
documentation 2nd
   designer programmers 2nd
       common domain models 2nd 3rd
       delivery packages
       design notes 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
       screen drafts 2nd 3rd
       source code
       tests 2nd 3rd
   videos
domains
   common models 2nd 3rd
   models
drafts
   screen 2nd 3rd
drawings
   common domain models 2nd 3rd
duration of projects, Process Miniature strategy 2nd
dynamic backlogs
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

early victories
Early Victory strategy
Easiest Thing First, Hardest Second strategy
easy access to expert users
economic consequences of decisions
editing
    CPs 2nd
efficiency 2nd
    development
    methodologies
    non-bottleneck activities
    of communication
element-by-element descriptions, methodologies 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
elements
    communication
    validation
empirical evidence
    grouding 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
end-to-end functions
    Walking Skeleton strategy
entrys
    CPs 2nd
episodes
    development
errors
    bug reports 2nd
    continous integration-with-test
essential interaction design 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
estimation
    Delphi Estimation strategy 2nd
    tasks
evaluation
    agile development 2nd
    field report 2nd 3rd
exchanges
    information
executive sponsors 2nd 3rd
    Blitz Planning strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
executive summary
   field report 2nd
Expert in Earshot strategy
expert users 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
   access 2nd 3rd
   availability
   Blitz Planning strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
   collaboration
   feedback
   user role models 2nd
expert users, access
expertise rankings 2nd
Exploration phase 2nd 3rd
Exploratory 360°
Exploratory 360° strategy 2nd
Extreme Programming (XP) 2nd 3rd
   methodologies 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

face-to-face communication
feedback
    increasing
    osmotic communication 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
field report
    analysis 2nd
    chornology 2nd
       calibration 2nd
       completion
       consolidation 2nd
       CP entry and edit 2nd
       Exploratin phase 2nd 3rd
       first planning meeting 2nd
       refelction workshops 2nd
       viewing meeting
       walking skeleton 2nd
    comments 2nd 3rd
    complaince 2nd
    evaluation 2nd 3rd
    executive summary 2nd
files
    requirements 2nd
findings
    auditor's report 2nd 3rd 4th
fine-grained planning
first planning meeting 2nd 3rd 4th
fixed time projects
fixed-length iterations
fixed-scope projects
flexibility
    of development 2nd 3rd
fluency
focal roles
focal tasks
focal user groups
focus 2nd 3rd
    CMM(I) 2nd 3rd
    Scrum 2nd
focus of methodologies 2nd
following
formality
formatting
    methodologies
    project status 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
frameworks
    estimation of
frequency
    intergation
frequency of personal collaboration
frequent deliveries
    Scrum
frequent delivery 2nd 3rd
frequent integration
    automated testing 2nd 3rd 4th
fuzzy descriptions of elments
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

goals
   actor-goal lists 2nd
Gold Rush strategy
graphs
   dependency
grounding 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

habitability 2nd
   of conventions
help
   text (writers)
Highest Business Value First stategy
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

iceberg lists
identifying
    releases
IE (Information Engineering)
implementation
    Walking Skeleton strategy
imprecise descriptions of elements
improvement, reflective 2nd
inception
    RUP
increasing
    feedback
Incremental Rearchitetcure strategy 2nd 3rd
incremental release plans
increments
    delivery
    lnegth of time
    walking skeleton 2nd
inerviews
    users
informaiton radiators
information
    exchanging
Information Engineering (IE)
Information Radiators strategy 2nd 3rd 4th
infrastructure
    Incremental Rearchitecture 2nd 3rd
    misinterpretations
initial projects, planning 2nd
inputs
    design/development
inspections
    usability
integraiton
    continous integration-with-test
integration
    automated tetsing 2nd 3rd 4th
    cycles
    frequent
    periods
    workflow dependency graphs
intentions
    violation of
interaction
    essential interaction design strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
    screen drafts 2nd 3rd
interactive communication
interfaces
    regression testing
    system architecture
intermediate deliverables, reducing need for
interviews
    projects 2nd 3rd
ISO 9001 compliance
ISO-9000 certification
items
    unclassified
iteration 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    cycles 2nd
       one-week 2nd
       two-month 2nd
    delivery cycles
    misinterpretations 2nd
    optimal length 2nd 3rd
    start-up/shut-down
iterations
    delivery
    fixed-length
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

jam sessions
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

Keep/Try Reflection Workshops 2nd 3rd
key properties
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

large teams 2nd
lead designers 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
    project maps
length of iterations 2nd 3rd
life cycles
    compliance 2nd
lists
    actor-goal 2nd
    iceberg
    risk 2nd
loss of comfort (C)
loss of discretionary moneys (D)
loss of essential moneys (E)
loss of life (L)
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

management
  agile development 2nd
  configuration 2nd
      automated testing 2nd 3rd 4th
  executive sponsors 2nd
  projects
Management System Audit Plan
manuals
  training/user
mapping
  burn charts 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th
  navigation maps
  Project Maps
maps
  Blitz Planning strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
  projects
marking
  Walking Skeleton strategy
meetings
  daily stand-up
  first planning 2nd
  iteration cycles
  safety
  viewing
methodlogies
  element-by-element descriptions 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
methodologies
  chapter formats
  efficiency
  focus 2nd
  RUP 2nd 3rd 4th
  safety
  Scrum
  shapng
  summary sheets
  unclassifed items
Methodology Shaping strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
methologies
   grounding 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
   UML 2nd
milestones
   misinterpretations
Mimeo radio devices
minute-to-minute processes
misinterpretations
   code ownership 2nd
   communcation 2nd 3rd 4th
   delivery
   demo deliveries 2nd
   infrastructure
   iterations 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
   milestones
   mission statements
   regression testing
   user availability
mission statements 2nd 3rd
   misinterpretations
models
   common domain 2nd 3rd
   CP entry and edit 2nd
   domains
   role 2nd
   roles
   tasks
monotony
multiple deliveries
multiple meeting locations
multiple project cycles
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

navigation maps
nested-cycle view
non-bottleneck activities
notes
   design 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

one-week iterations 2nd
optimal length of iterations 2nd 3rd
optimization
   project plan priorities
organizational boundaries, collaboration across
osmotic communicaiton
   distributed teams 2nd
   large teams
osmotic communication 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
output
   capturing
outputs
   design/development
oversteering
ownership
   code 2nd
ownership models
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

packages
    delivery
paths
    communication 2nd
patterns
PC-attached whiteboards
performance
    RUP
periods
    integration
personal collaboration
    frequecny of
personal safety 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    collaboration
personal safety property
personalities 2nd
    adverse affect on methodologies
    testing
phases
    Exploration 2nd 3rd
planning
    activies 2nd
    Blitz Planning strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
    coarse grained
    design
    development
    fine-grained
    first planning meeting 2nd
    incremental releases
    initial projects 2nd
    iteration 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
   iterations
        one-week 2nd
        two-month 2nd
    products 2nd
    projects
        optimizing priorities
    release plans 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
       recalibrating
porjects
   rules
postdelivery reflection workshops
predictability
printing whiteboards
priorities
   methodologies 2nd
   of projects
   optimizing
   safety
priorties
   analysis 2nd
problem solving techniques
process minatures
Process Miniatures
Process Miniatures strategy 2nd
processes
   CMM(I)
   cycles [See also cycles]
   cyclic [See also cycles]
   No-Process
   RUP 2nd 3rd 4th
productivity
products
   planning 2nd
   project samples
   roles 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
       business experts/expert users 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
       coordinators 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th
17th 18th 19th 20th
       designer programmers 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th
15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th
       lead designers
       reflection workshop results 2nd
       sponsors 2nd
       team structure 2nd
       writers
programming 2nd [See also code] [See also design]
   side-by-side 2nd
progress
   burn charts 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th
Project Maps
projects
   add-on practices
 agile development 2nd
auditor's report
    conclusions 2nd
    findings 2nd 3rd 4th
    recommendations 2nd
    scope
 CMM(I) 2nd 3rd
 code
 collaboration
 conventions 2nd
 coordinators
    iteration 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    project maps
    project status 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    release plans 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    risk lists 2nd
    viewing schedules
 cycles 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
    chartering 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th
    daily and weekly
    delivery 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    development episodes
    integration
    iteration 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    process overview
 distributed teams 2nd
field report
    analysis 2nd
    calibration 2nd
    chronology 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    comments 2nd 3rd
    completion
    compliance 2nd
    consolidation 2nd
    CP entry and edit 2nd
    evaluation 2nd 3rd
    executive summary 2nd
    first planning meeting 2nd
    reflection workshops 2nd
    viewing meeting
    walking skeleton 2nd
 fixed-scope
 fixed-time
 grounding 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
 interviews 2nd 3rd 4th
 large teams
 management
methodologies
    chapter formats
    descriptions 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    focus of 2nd
 misinterpretations
    code ownership 2nd
    communication 2nd 3rd 4th
    delivery
    demo deliveries 2nd
    infrastructure
    iterations 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    milestones
    mission statements
    regression testing
    user availability
 mission statements 2nd 3rd
 multiple deliveries
 planning
    optimizing priorities
 properties 2nd
    automated testing 2nd 3rd 4th
    expert user access 2nd 3rd
    focus 2nd
    frequent delivery 2nd
    osmotic communication 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
    personal safety 2nd 3rd
    reflective improvement 2nd
reflection workshops
    results 2nd
 rules 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th
 RUP 2nd 3rd 4th
 safety
 samples
 Scrum 2nd
 starting
strategies
    Blitz Planning 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
    burn charts 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th
    daily stand-up meetings
    Delphi Estimation 2nd
    Early Victory
    essential interaction design 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
    Exploratory 360° 2nd
      Incremental Rearchitecture 2nd 3rd
      Information Radiators 2nd 3rd 4th
      Methodology Shaping 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
      Process Minatures 2nd
      Reflection Workshops 2nd 3rd 4th
      side-by-side programming 2nd
      Walking Skeleton
      Walking Skeleton;marking
   summary sheets
   UML 2nd
   XP 2nd
properties 2nd 3rd
   automated testing 2nd 3rd 4th
   compliance 2nd
   expert user access 2nd 3rd
   focus 2nd
   frequent delivery 2nd
   key
   osmotic communicaiton 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
   personal safety 2nd 3rd
   refelctive improvement 2nd
   Scrum 2nd
proposals
   field summary 2nd
prototypes, field summary
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

QA (quality assurance)
 personalities
     testing
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

RAD (Rapid Application Development)
Rapid Application Development (RAD)
rapid feedback
rating
    agile development 2nd
Rational Unified Process
real users
    availability
    delivery to
    feedback
recalibration
    release plans
recommendations
    auditor's report 2nd
refactoring code
reflection workshops
Reflection Workshops
reflection workshops 2nd 3rd
    results 2nd
Reflection Workshops strategy
    Keep/Try 2nd 3rd
reflective improvement 2nd 3rd 4th
regression testing 2nd
    intefaces
release plans 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    recalibrating
releases
    identifying
    incremental plans
repeatability
reports
    bug 2nd
requirements
    CMM(I) 2nd 3rd
    determination of
    Exploration phase 2nd 3rd
    files 2nd
    Incremental Rearchitecture 2nd 3rd
    reviews
    sampling
    technology
results
    automated test
    reflection workshops 2nd
reviews
    design 2nd 3rd
    development
    requirements
revisions
risk lists 2nd
roles
    compliance 2nd
    focal
    models 2nd 3rd
    users
    work products 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
       business experts/expert users 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
       coordinators 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th
17th 18th 19th 20th
       designer programmers 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th
15th 16th 17th 18th
       lead designers
       reflection workshop results 2nd
       sponsors 2nd
       team structure 2nd
       testers 2nd
       writers
rules
    chapter formats
    defining
    projects 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th
   teams
       sizes of
RUP (Rational Unified Process) 2nd 3rd 4th
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

safet
safety 2nd
    collaboration
    core of Crystal Clear
    personal 2nd 3rd
samples
    projects
sampling
schedules
    burn charts 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th
    viewing
schedulling
    viewing
schemas
    common domain models 2nd 3rd
scope
    auditor's report
    fixed-scope projects
screen drafts 2nd 3rd
Scrum 2nd
Scrum methodology
serial development 2nd 3rd
shaping methodologies
shut-down
    iteration
side-by-side programming
side-by-side programming strategy 2nd
simultaneous develpment
sizes
    of teams
       large
sizes of teams
skill
small teams
sorting
    tasks
source code
spare leader capacity
speed
    of development 2nd 3rd
spikes 2nd
sponsors
    executive
    mission statements 2nd
    project map
stand-up meetings
start-up
    iteration
starting
    projects
statements
    mission 2nd
status
    iteration 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    projects 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
strategies
    Blitz Planning 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
    burn charts 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th
    daily stand-up meetings
    Delphi Estimation 2nd
    Early Victory
    essential interaction design 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
    Exploratory 360° 2nd
    Incremental Rearchitecture 2nd 3rd
    Information Radiators 2nd 3rd 4th
    Methodology Shaping 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
    Process Miniatures 2nd
    Reflection Workshops 2nd 3rd 4th
    side-by-side programming 2nd
    Walking Skeleton
       marking
structure
    teams 2nd
subteams
summary sheets
supercycles 2nd
supercyles
sweet spots of speed development
system architecture
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

tables
   actor-goal lists 2nd
tagging
   tasks
task cards
tasks
   capturing
   estimation
   focal
   mapping
   models
   sorting
teams
   as groups
   conventions
   distributed 2nd
   large
   reflection workshop results 2nd
   size of
   sizes
   structure 2nd
technical environments
technology
   sampling
technology requirements
testers 2nd 3rd
testing
   automated 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
   automated test results
   code 2nd 3rd 4th
   personalities
   regression 2nd
      interfaces
text [See also documentation]
   system architetcure
the Agile Development Manifesto
The No-Process process
TickIT Guide
time
    fixed-time projects
time-boxing
timelines
    Blitz Planning strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
tolerances 2nd
tools 2nd
    RUP
tracking
    agile development
    coarse grained
    fine-grained
training manuals
transition zones
troubleshooting
    bug reports 2nd
trust
trust, building
trust, establishing
two-month iterations 2nd
types
    of methodology elements 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

UI (User Intentions)
UML (Unified Modeling Language)
   architecture 2nd
unclassified items in methodologies
understanding
undetected defects
undetected defects, damage due to
Unified Modeling Language [See UML]
updating
   initial project plans
usability inspections
use cases
use cases, business experts/expert users
user manuals
users
   access 2nd 3rd 4th
   availability 2nd
   Blitz Planning strategy 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
   collaboration
   demos
   deployment
   expert 2nd 3rd 4th
      user role models 2nd
   experts
   feedback
   focal user groups
   identifying
   interviews
  iterations
      misinterpretations 2nd
   role models 2nd
   roles
   screen drafts 2nd 3rd
   viewing prior to delivery
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

validation
   design
   development
validaton
   elements
values
   business-value sampling
verification
   design
   development
videos
   documentation
viewing
   schedules
viewing meeting
viewing schedules
visual modeling
   RUP
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

walking skeleton 2nd
Walking Skeleton strategy 2nd
   marking
weekly cycles
whiteboards
work products
   compliance 2nd
   concurrent development
   project samples
   roles 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
      business experts/expert users 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
      coordinators 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th
17th 18th 19th 20th
      designer programmers 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th
15th 16th 17th 18th
      lead designers
      reflection workshop results 2nd
      sponsors 2nd
      team structure 2nd
      testers 2nd
      writers
workflow
   dependency graphs
working environments
workshops
   essential interaction design
   methodology shaping 2nd
   reflection 2nd
   Reflection Workshops
      Keep/Try 2nd 3rd
Worst Thing First strategy
writers 2nd
Index

[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] [F] [G] [H] [I] [J] [K] [L] [M] [N] [O] [P] [Q] [R] [S] [T] [U] [V] [W] [X]

XP 2nd
XP (Extreme Programming
XP (Extreme Programming)
  methodologies 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
